About aciclovir
-Brand names: Zovirax, Cymex Ultra, Virasorb
Aciclovir (or acyclovir) is an antiviral medicine.

It treats a range of infections caused by herpes viruses, including:

cold sores
genital herpes
eye infections
Your doctor may prescribe aciclovir to prevent you getting these infections if you've had them before or if you have a weak immune system.

It's also used to treat chickenpox and shingles.

Aciclovir is available on prescription. It comes as tablets, a liquid that you swallow, an eye ointment, a cold sore cream and a cream for genital herpes.

It's sometimes given by injection, but this is usually only done in hospital.

You can buy aciclovir cold sore cream at most pharmacies and shops without a prescription.

Key facts
Start taking or using aciclovir as soon as you get the first signs of infection.
For most infections, you should start to feel better after taking or using aciclovir for a few days.
Common side effects of the tablets and liquid include headaches, feeling dizzy, and feeling or being sick.
If aciclovir tablets or liquid make you feel dizzy, or if the eye ointment affects your vision, do not drive or cycle until you feel better.
Wash your hands before and after using the genital herpes cream, cold sore cream or eye ointment.

Who can and cannot take or use aciclovir
-Brand names: Zovirax, Cymex Ultra, Virasorb
Who can take or use aciclovir
Most adults and children can take aciclovir tablets or liquid, or use aciclovir cream, cold sore cream or eye ointment.

Who may not be able to take or use aciclovir
Aciclovir is not suitable for some people. To make sure it's safe for you, tell your doctor if you:

have ever had an allergic reaction to aciclovir or any other medicine
have kidney problems
are over 65 years old
are pregnant, trying to get pregnant or breastfeeding
If your immune system is weakened (for example, if you have HIV or AIDS, or you have had a bone marrow transplant), talk to your doctor about the best type of aciclovir for you. They may recommend tablets rather than the cream.
How and when to take or use aciclovir
-Brand names: Zovirax, Cymex Ultra, Virasorb
It's important to start taking (or using) this medicine as soon as you get the first signs of infection.

A cold sore usually starts with a tingling, itchy or burning feeling.

Dosage for aciclovir tablets and liquid
Doses will vary, depending on why you're taking aciclovir. Your doctor will tell you how much to take and how often.

A single dose is generally between 200mg and 800mg. Doses may be lower for children.

You'll usually take aciclovir 2 to 5 times a day. Try to space your doses evenly throughout the day.

If you take aciclovir:

4 times a day – you could take it first thing in the morning, at midday, in the late afternoon and at bedtime
5 times a day – you could take it at 7am, 11am, 3pm, 7pm and 11pm, for example
Keep taking the medicine until it's all finished or until your doctor or pharmacist tells you to stop taking it.

For treating a viral infection, you'll usually take aciclovir for 5 to 10 days. For prevention, you may need to take it for a long time.

How to take tablets and liquid
You can take aciclovir tablets or liquid with or without food. Drink plenty of water while taking this medicine to help keep your kidneys working well.

Swallow the tablets whole with a drink of water.

If you find tablets difficult to swallow, you can dissolve them in water. Add a tablet to a small glass of water and stir. Drink all the liquid to make sure you get the full dose.

Aciclovir liquid will come with a measuring spoon or plastic syringe to help you measure your dose. If you do not have a measuring spoon or syringe, ask your pharmacist for one. Do not use a kitchen teaspoon as it will not measure the right amount of medicine.

How to use cream for cold sores
Wash your hands before and after using the cream.

Put a thin layer of cream on the cold sore 5 times a day. Do this every 4 hours – for example, at 7am, 11am, 3pm, 7pm and 11pm.

Do not put aciclovir cream inside your mouth, in your eyes or vagina.

Use the cream for at least 4 days. If the cold sore has not healed by then, you can carry on using the cream for another 6 days.

If the cold sore still has not healed after a total of 10 days, stop using the cream and tell your doctor.

How to use cream for genital herpes
Wash your hands before and after using the cream.

Put a thin layer of cream on the affected area 5 times a day. Do this every 4 hours – for example, at 7am, 11am, 3pm, 7pm and 11pm.

Use the cream for at least 5 days. If the genital herpes sore has not healed by then, you can carry on using the cream for another 5 days.

If the affected area has still not healed after a total of 10 days, stop using the cream and tell your doctor.

How to use eye ointment
Put the ointment in the affected eye 5 times a day, or as your doctor advises.

Wash your hands.
Gently pull down your lower eyelid and tilt your head back.
Hold the tube with the nozzle close to your eye and gently squeeze about 1 centimetre of ointment into the space between your lower lid and your eye.
Close your eye for a few minutes.
Try not to let the tip of the eye ointment tube touch any part of your eye. This is to keep it free from germs.

Space the times when you use the eye ointment evenly throughout the day – for example at 7am, 11am, 3pm, 7pm and 11pm.

Keep using the eye ointment for at least 3 days after your eye has got better.

If you wear contact lenses, do not use them while you're using the eye ointment. This is because some medicines or preservatives in eye ointments can build up in contact lenses and may damage them.

Your vision might become a little blurred after you use the eye ointment. Blink several times after putting the eye ointment in to help clear your vision. Do not drive, cycle or use any tools or machinery until you can see clearly again.

If you forget to take or use it
If you forget a dose of aciclovir, take it (or use the cream or eye ointment) as soon as you remember, unless it's nearly time for your next dose. In this case, just skip the missed dose and continue with your next one at the usual time.

Never have 2 doses at the same time. Never have an extra dose to make up for a forgotten one.

If you forget doses often, it may help to set an alarm to remind you. You could also ask your pharmacist for advice on other ways to help you remember to take your medicines.

If you take or use too much
Using too much aciclovir cream or eye ointment is unlikely to harm you.

Taking too many aciclovir tablets or too much liquid is also unlikely to harm you, unless you do so over several days.

Talk to your doctor or pharmacist if you're worried that you have had too much aciclovir.
Side effects of aciclovir
-Brand names: Zovirax, Cymex Ultra, Virasorb
Like all medicines, aciclovir can cause side effects in some people, although not everyone gets them.

Many people have no side effects at all, or only minor ones.

Common side effects (tablets and liquid)
These common side effects of aciclovir tablets and liquid happen in less than 1 in 10 people. There are things you can do to help cope with them:
Headaches
Feeling dizzy
Feeling or being sick (nausea or vomiting)
Diarrhoea
Skin becomes sensitive to sunlight
Speak to a doctor or pharmacist if the advice on how to cope does not help and a side effect is still bothering you or does not go away.

Side effects (genital herpes cream and cold sore cream)
These uncommon side effects of the genital herpes cream and cold sore cream happen in less than 1 in 100 people:

Burning or stinging for a short time after applying the cream
Itchy, dry or flaky skin
Keep using the medicine, but speak to a doctor or pharmacist if the advice on how to cope does not help and a side effect is still bothering you or does not go away.

Common side effects (eye ointment)
Side effects of the eye ointment are usually mild. These common side effects happen in more than 1 in 10 people:

Burning or irritation in your eye, or feeling as if there's something in your eye
Eyes being more sensititive to light
Serious allergic reaction
In rare cases, aciclovir can cause a serious allergic reaction (anaphylaxis).

Immediate action required:
Call 999 now if:
your lips, mouth, throat or tongue suddenly become swollen
you're breathing very fast or struggling to breathe (you may become very wheezy or feel like you're choking or gasping for air)
your throat feels tight or you're struggling to swallow
your skin, tongue or lips turn blue, grey or pale (if you have black or brown skin, this may be easier to see on the palms of your hands or soles of your feet)
you suddenly become very confused, drowsy or dizzy
someone faints and cannot be woken up
a child is limp, floppy or not responding like they normally do (their head may fall to the side, backwards or forwards, or they may find it difficult to lift their head or focus on your face)
You or the person who's unwell may also have a rash that's swollen, raised, itchy, blistered or peeling.

These can be signs of a serious allergic reaction and may need immediate treatment in hospital.
Pregnancy, breastfeeding and fertility while taking or using aciclovir
-Brand names: Zovirax, Cymex Ultra, Virasorb
Aciclovir and pregnancy
Aciclovir cream, eye ointment, tablets or liquid are not known to be harmful in pregnancy. Aciclovir can help reduce the severity of herpes and chickenpox.

Speak to your doctor or pharmacist. They will help you decide on the best treatment for you and your baby.

Aciclovir and breastfeeding
If your doctor or health visitor says that your baby is healthy, it's OK to take aciclovir tablets or liquid while breastfeeding.

Aciclovir from the tablets or liquid passes into breast milk in very small amounts, and it is unlikely to cause any side effects in your baby.

You can also use aciclovir cream or eye ointment while breastfeeding. It is likely that only tiny amounts will get into your breast milk which would not be expected to cause any problems in your baby.

Make sure that your baby does not come into contact with areas where you've used the medicine.

If you notice that your baby is not feeding as well as usual, or is being sick or has diarrhoea, or you have any other concerns about your baby, talk to your health visitor, midwife, pharmacist or doctor as soon as possible.

aking or using aciclovir with other medicines and herbal supplements
-Brand names: Zovirax, Cymex Ultra, Virasorb
Cautions with other medicines
Some medicines can affect the way aciclovir tablets or liquid work. They can also make you more likely to get side effects.

If you're using aciclovir cream on your skin, this is less likely to react with other medicines.

Tell your doctor if you take any of the following medicines before taking aciclovir:

cimetidine, a medicine for stomach ulcers
mycophenolate mofetil, a medicine given after organ transplants
probenecid, a medicine for gout
aminophylline or theophylline, medicines for asthma
Mixing aciclovir with herbal remedies and supplements
There's not enough information to say that herbal remedies or supplements are safe to take with aciclovir. They're not tested in the same way as pharmacy and prescription medicines. They're generally not tested for the effect they have on other medicines.




About acrivastine
-Brand name: Benadryl Allergy Relief
Acrivastine is an antihistamine medicine that helps the symptoms of allergies.

It helps to treat:

symptoms from hay fever
conjunctivitis (red, itchy eyes)
eczema
hives (urticaria)
reactions to insect bites and stings
some food allergies
Acrivastine is a non-drowsy antihistamine. It's less likely to make you feel sleepy than some other antihistamines.

Acrivastine comes as capsules and is available on prescription. You can also buy smaller packs from pharmacies and supermarkets.

Sometimes it's combined with a decongestant called pseudoephedrine to unblock your nose and sinuses.

Key facts
You can usually take acrivastine as you need it, up to 3 times a day.
Acrivastine is classed as a non-drowsy antihistamine, but some people still find it makes them feel quite sleepy.
Common side effects include a dry mouth and dizziness. Do not drive, cycle or operate tools or machinery if you're feeling dizzy or sleepy.
Do not drink grapefruit juice while you're taking acrivastine, as it might make you more likely to get side effects.
It's best not to drink alcohol while you're taking acrivastine as it can make you feel sleepy.
When acrivastine is mixed with pseudoephedrine, it's called Benadryl Allergy Relief Plus Decongestant.

Who can and cannot take acrivastine
-Brand name: Benadryl Allergy Relief
Who can take acrivastine
Most adults up to 65 years, and children 12 years and over, can take acrivastine capsules that you buy from pharmacies and supermarkets.

Who may not be able to take acrivastine
Acrivastine is not recommended for people over 65 years old because very little research on the medicine has been done in this age group.

Talk to your pharmacist or doctor if you're over 65 and want to take acrivastine.

Acrivastine is not suitable for some people. To make sure it's safe for you, tell your doctor or pharmacist if you:

have ever had an allergic reaction to acrivastine or any other medicine
have kidney disease
have a rare condition called porphyria
are due to have an allergy test – taking acrivastine may affect the results, so you might need to stop taking it a few days before the test
are pregnant, trying to get pregnant or breastfeeding




About adalimumab
How to say adalimumab: AH-dah-lee-mu-mab.

Adalimumab is a biological medicine. This means it's made from proteins or other substances produced by the body. It's used to reduce swelling (inflammation) by acting on your immune system.

Adalimumab is used to treat inflammation of the:

joints (rheumatoid arthritis, polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis and active enthesitis-related arthritis)
skin (plaque psoriasis and hidradenitis suppurativa)
joints and skin (psoriatic arthritis)
spine, causing back pain (axial spondyloarthritis and ankylosing spondylitis)
gut and ulcers in the lining of the gut (Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis)
layer beneath the white of the eyeball (non-infectious uveitis)
Humira is the brand name of the original adalimumab medicine. There are now 5 newer versions of adalimumab, known by the brand names Amgevita, Hyrimoz, Idacio, Imraldi and Yuflyma.

These newer medicines are biosimilars. A biosimilar is a similar version of the original biological medicine. It works in the same way, by blocking part of your immune system to reduce inflammation.

If you switch, your body should respond the same way as if you'd stayed on Humira. You should not notice any difference.

Adalimumab is available on prescription. It comes as a pre-filled syringe or an injection pen that you inject under the skin. If you're switching from Humira to a different brand of adalimumab, the way the injection pen or syringe works might be different.

Key facts
Adalimumab is given by an injection under your skin. It works by blocking part of your immune system to reduce inflammation.
It takes a few weeks for adalimumab to work. It may take longer depending on your condition.
Adalimumab can make you more likely to get infections. Tell your doctor if you get an infection, such as coronavirus (COVID-19), or if you come into contact with anyone who has shingles, chickenpox or measles. These infections can make you very ill.
If you need to have a vaccine, ask your doctor or pharmacist whether it's a live vaccine and if there's an alternative inactivated vaccine available. Adalimumab may increase the risk of getting an infection caused by a live vaccine.
You might feel dizzy or have blurred vision after taking adalimumab. If you have any of these symptoms, do not drive, cycle or use machinery or tools.
When you start taking adalimumab you'll be given a patient alert card. Carry this with you all the time. It tells healthcare professionals that you're taking adalimumab. If you do not have a patient alert card, you can ask your specialist for one.


1. About alendronic acid
Alendronic acid is a type of medicine called a bisphosphonate. Bisphosponates are prescribed to help your bones stay as strong as possible. Taking alendronic acid can help if you have, or are at risk of developing, osteoporosis. This is a condition that causes your bones to get weaker and be more likely to break.

Osteoporosis can happen for many reasons, but you are more likely to get it if:

you're a woman who has been through the menopause
you take steroids, such as prednisolone, every day for a long time (which means 3 months, or longer)
you've had a certain type of cancer treatment – some treatments can increase your risk of developing osteoporosis. Your oncology doctor or nurse will discuss this with you
Talk to your doctor if you are worried about the health of your bones because of the medicines you take, or changes to your hormone levels because of the menopause.

Alendronic acid is only available on prescription. You can take it as a standard tablet, a soluble tablet that dissolves in water, or as a liquid that you drink.

2. Key facts
Alendronic acid is good for your bones – it makes them stronger and less likely to break.
You'll usually take it as a tablet or liquid, once a week.
Take alendronic acid first thing in the morning, before you have anything to eat or drink and before you take any other medicines. Stay sitting or standing for 30 minutes so the medicine does not irritate your food pipe (oesophagus).
It's important to look after your teeth and have regular dental check-ups while taking alendronic acid because it can sometimes damage the jaw bone, but this is rare.
Alendronic acid is known as Fosavance when it's mixed with colecalciferol (vitamin D3)
3. Who can and cannot take alendronic acid
Alendronic acid can be taken by most adults aged 18 and over. It's sometimes prescribed for children with osteoporosis.

Do not give it to children under the age of 18 unless it's prescribed by a doctor.

Alendronic acid is not suitable for some people. To make sure it's safe for you, tell your doctor if you:

have ever had an allergic reaction to alendronic acid or any other medicine
have problems digesting food, swallowing or other problems with your food pipe (oesophagus)
have taken alendronic acid before but it made you feel dizzy and unable to stand or sit upright for at least 30 minutes after taking it
have low calcium levels in your blood – alendronic acid sometimes causes low blood calcium, so your calcium levels could become even lower
have kidney problems
have cancer, or are having chemotherapy or radiotherapy
have problems with your teeth, or are waiting for dental treatment such as having a tooth out
smoke, or used to smoke – this may increase your risk of dental problems
are pregnant, trying to get pregnant or breastfeeding
4. How and when to take alendronic acid
Follow your doctor's instructions about how and when to take your medicine.

Dosage and strength
The usual dose of alendronic acid for adults is 70mg taken once a week. There is also a 10mg tablet you take once a day.

You will usually take alendronic acid once a week:

as a standard tablet
as a liquid that you drink
as a tablet that dissolves in water (dispersible)
Whether you take alendronic acid daily or weekly, you need to take your medicine at the same time each day or day of the week. If it's weekly, choose a day that suits your routine.

How to take alendronic acid
It's important to follow the instructions for this medicine very carefully. If you do not, it may not work or it could irritate and damage your food pipe as you swallow it.

The best time to take your medicine is usually 30 minutes before you have breakfast. Take it on an empty stomach, before you have anything to eat or drink (other than plain tap water) and before you take any other medicines that you swallow.

Alendronic acid works best on an empty stomach because your body can absorb it properly.

It's important to take alendronic acid while you're sitting up or standing. Try to stay upright for 30 minutes after taking your medicine – you can be sitting, standing or walking.

5. Side effects
Like all medicines, alendronic acid can cause side effects in some people, but many people have no side effects, or only minor ones.

Common side effects
These common side effects happen in more than 1 in 100 people. Talk to your doctor or pharmacist if they bother you or do not go away:

constipation
diarrhoea
feeling dizzy (or signs of vertigo)
headaches, muscle or joint pain
swollen joints, hands or legs
indigestion, bloating or wind
itching or a mild rash
feeling sleepy or tired
hair loss
Serious side effects
Some people may have serious side effects when taking alendronic acid. These include heartburn (or heartburn that gets worse), problems or pain when swallowing, or chest pain. These may be signs of ulcers in your food pipe (oesophagus). If this happens, stop taking alendronic acid and speak to a doctor.

Other serious side effects are rare, but call a doctor straight away if you have:

a loose tooth, mouth sores, or swelling or pain in your mouth or jaw – contact your dentist as well as your doctor, as this could be a sign of damage to your jaw bone
pain, weakness or discomfort in your thigh, hip or groin – this happens rarely but may be an early sign of a broken thigh bone
severe pain in your joints, muscles or bones
ear pain, discharge from your ear or an ear infection – these can be signs of damage to the bones in your inner ear
black or red poo – these can be signs of an ulcer or bleeding from your gut
blurred vision, painful or red eyes – these can be signs of swelling of the eye
muscle cramps or spasms, a tingling sensation in your fingers or around your mouth – these can be symptoms of low calcium levels in your blood



About allopurinol
-Brand names: Zyloric, Uricto
Allopurinol is a medicine used to lower levels of uric acid in your blood.

If you produce too much uric acid or your kidneys do not filter enough out, it can build up and cause tiny, sharp crystals. These crystals can form around your joints, which cause the swollen and painful symptoms of gout. Crystals can also collect inside the kidneys and damage them.

It may also be prescribed if you're having some types of cancer treatment. Some treatments can cause a build-up of uric acid.

Allopurinol comes as tablets and is only available on prescription.

Key facts
It may take several months before you feel the full benefit of allopurinol.
During the first few months of treatment, as allopurinol starts to work, you may get more gout attacks. However, your doctor will prescribe an NSAID such as ibuprofen, or colchicine to help with this.
Drinking too much alcohol can increase the level of uric acid in your blood. This could make your gout worse.
When you take allopurinol regularly, it can lower the number of gout attacks and help prevent damage to the joints.
Usually, you'll start allopurinol after an acute attack of gout has completely settled.

About alogliptin
Alogliptin is a medicine used to treat type 2 diabetes.

Type 2 diabetes is a condition where the body does not make enough insulin, or the insulin that it makes does not work properly.

This can cause high blood sugar levels (hyperglycaemia).

Alogliptin is prescribed for people who still have high blood sugar, even though they have a sensible diet and exercise regularly.

It works by increasing the amount of insulin that your body makes. Insulin is the hormone that controls sugar levels in your blood.

Alogliptin is only available on prescription.

It comes as tablets that you swallow. It also comes as tablets containing a mixture of alogliptin and another diabetes medicine called metformin. This is known by the brand name Vipdomet.

Key facts
Alogliptin starts to work within a few hours. You need to take it every day to make sure your blood sugar stays as stable as possible.
You take alogliptin once a day.
The most common side effects of alogliptin are headaches, indigestion, diarrhoea and skin rashes.
This medicine does not usually make you put on weight.
If you have diabetes, you're entitled to free prescriptions for all of your medicines, not just your diabetes ones.


About amitriptyline for depression
Amitriptyline is an antidepressant medicine. It's used to treat low mood and depression.

It works by increasing levels of a chemical called serotonin in your brain.

It's only available on prescription. It comes as tablets and as a liquid that you swallow

Amitriptyline is also used to treat nerve pain and prevent migraines.

Key facts
You may start to feel better after 2 to 4 weeks but it can take 4 to 6 weeks for amitriptyline to work fully.
Common side effects include a dry mouth and constipation. They're usually mild and go away after a couple of weeks.
Amitriptyline can cause extra side effects if you stop taking it suddenly. Talk to your doctor if you want to stop taking it.
It's best not to drive, cycle or use machinery or tools for the first few days of treatment until you know how amitriptyline makes you feel.

About amitriptyline for pain and migraine
Amitriptyline is a medicine used for treating pain. You can take it:

to treat nerve pain (neuralgia) and pain that lasts a long time
to help prevent migraines
Amitriptyline is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets and as a liquid that you swallow.

Amitriptyline is also used to treat depression. The doses used to treat pain are lower than the doses for depression. Taking amitriptyline for pain will not have the same effect as taking it for depression.

Key facts
It's best to take amitriptyline in the evening or before you go to bed. This is because it can make you feel sleepy.
You may start to feel better after 1 or 2 weeks, but it can take 6 weeks for amitriptyline to work as a painkiller.
Amitriptyline can cause extra side effects if you stop taking it suddenly. Talk to your doctor if you want to stop taking it.
Do not drive, cycle or operate heavy machinery if amitriptyline makes you feel sleepy.
You can drink alcohol while taking amitriptyline but it may make you feel sleepy. It's usually best to stop drinking alcohol until you see how the medicine affects you.


About amlodipine
Amlodipine is a calcium channel blocker used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension). If you have high blood pressure, taking amlodipine can help to prevent future heart disease, heart attacks and strokes.

It is also used to prevent chest pain caused by heart disease (angina).

Amlodipine helps high blood pressure by relaxing and widening blood vessels. This lowers your blood pressure and makes it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body.

With angina, you usually get chest pain because the arteries going to the heart have become hardened and narrowed. Amlodipine helps by improving the blood and oxygen supply to your heart.

This medicine is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets or as a liquid you swallow.

Key facts
You'll usually take amlodipine once a day. You can take it at any time, but try to make sure it's around the same time each day.
Amlodipine can make some people feel dizzy. If this happens to you, do not drive a car, ride a bike, or use tools or machinery until you feel better.
The most common side effects include headaches, flushing, feeling tired and swollen ankles. These usually improve after a few days.
Amlodipine can also be called amlodipine besilate, amlodipine maleate or amlodipine mesilate. They have different ingredients but they all work as well as each other.
Having large amounts of grapefruit or grapefruit juice can increase the amount of amlodipine in your body and make side effects worse.


Amoxicillin
-Brand name: Respillin
On this page
About amoxicillin
Key facts
Who can and cannot take amoxicillin
How and when to take amoxicillin
Side effects
How to cope with side effects of amoxicillin
Pregnancy and breastfeeding
Cautions with other medicines
Common questions about amoxicillin
1. About amoxicillin
Amoxicillin is a penicillin antibiotic. It is used to treat bacterial infections, such as chest infections (including pneumonia) and dental abscesses. It can also be used together with other antibiotics and medicines to treat stomach ulcers.

It's often prescribed for children, to treat ear infections and chest infections.

Amoxicillin is only available on prescription. It comes as capsules or as a liquid that you swallow. It's also given by injection, but this is usually only done in hospital.

2. Key facts
For most infections, you'll start to feel better in a few days.
The most common side effects of amoxicillin are feeling sick (nausea) and diarrhoea.
Liquid amoxicillin can stain your teeth. This does not last and is removed by brushing.
You can drink alcohol while taking amoxicillin.
Sometimes, taking amoxicillin can cause thrush.
3. Who can and cannot take amoxicillin
Amoxicillin can be taken by most adults and children.

Find out more about giving amoxicillin to children on the Medicines for Children website.

Amoxicillin is not suitable for everyone. To make sure amoxicillin is safe for you, tell your doctor if you:

have ever had an allergic reaction to amoxicillin or penicillin or any other medicine
have liver or kidney problems
have recently had, or are due to have, any vaccinations
4. How and when to take amoxicillin
Dosage
The usual dose of amoxicillin capsules is 250mg to 500mg, taken 3 times a day. The dose may be lower for children.

Amoxicillin liquid is available in 125mg and 250mg doses.

Important
Carry on taking this medicine until you've completed the course, even if you feel better. If you stop your treatment early, the infection could come back.

How to take it
Try to space the doses evenly throughout the day. If you take it 3 times a day, this could be first thing in the morning, mid-afternoon and at bedtime.

You can take amoxicillin before or after food.

Swallow amoxicillin capsules whole with a drink of water. Do not chew or break them.

Amoxicillin is available as a liquid for children and people who find it difficult to swallow capsules.

If you or your child are taking liquid amoxicillin, it will usually be made up for you by your pharmacist. The medicine will come with a plastic syringe or spoon to help you measure out the right dose. If you do not have one, ask your pharmacist for one. Do not use a kitchen teaspoon as it will not measure the right amount.

If you forget to take it
If you forget to take a dose, take it as soon as you remember, unless it's nearly time for your next dose. In this case, just leave out the missed dose and take your next dose at the usual time.

Never take 2 doses at the same time. Never take an extra dose to make up for a forgotten one.

If you forget doses often, it may help to set an alarm to remind you. You could also ask your pharmacist for advice on other ways to remember your medicines.

If you take too much
Taking an extra dose of amoxicillin is unlikely to harm you or your child, but speak to your pharmacist or doctor if you're worried.

Urgent advice:Contact 111 for advice now if:
You have taken more than your prescribed dose of amoxicillin and have symptoms including:

stomach pain or you're being sick
blood in your pee
difficulty peeing or producing less pee than usual
Go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111

Information:
If you need to go to A&E, do not drive. Ask someone to drive you or call 999 and ask for an ambulance.

Bring the amoxicillin packet or leaflet inside it, any remaining medicine, and any other medicines you take.

5. Side effects
Like all medicines, amoxicillin can cause side effects, although not everyone gets them.

Common side effects
These common side effects happen in around 1 in 10 people. Keep taking the medicine, but talk to your doctor or pharmacist if these side effects bother you or do not go away:

feeling sick (nausea)
diarrhoea
Serious side effects
Serious side effects are rare and happen in less than 1 in 1,000 people.

Call a doctor or call 111 now if you get:

diarrhoea (possibly with stomach cramps) that contains blood or mucus or severe diarrhoea that lasts for more than 4 days
pale poo and dark pee, and the whites of your eyes or your skin turn yellow (although this may be less obvious on brown or black skin) – these can be signs of liver or gallbladder problems
bruising or changes in your skin colour
joint or muscle pain that comes on after 2 days of taking the medicine
a skin rash with circular red patches (this may be less obvious on brown or black skin)
Some of these serious side effects can happen up to 2 months after finishing the amoxicillin.

Serious allergic reaction
Around 1 in 15 people have an allergic reaction to amoxicillin.

In most cases, the allergic reaction is mild and can take the form of a skin rash.

Mild skin rashes can usually be treated by taking antihistamines.

In rare cases, amoxicillin can cause a serious allergic reaction (anaphylaxis).

Immediate action required:Call 999 now if:
your lips, mouth, throat or tongue suddenly become swollen
you're breathing very fast or struggling to breathe (you may become very wheezy or feel like you're choking or gasping for air)
your throat feels tight or you're struggling to swallow
your skin, tongue or lips turn blue, grey or pale (if you have black or brown skin, this may be easier to see on the palms of your hands or soles of your feet)
you suddenly become very confused, drowsy or dizzy
someone faints and cannot be woken up
a child is limp, floppy or not responding like they normally do (their head may fall to the side, backwards or forwards, or they may find it difficult to lift their head or focus on your face)
You or the person who's unwell may also have a rash that's swollen, raised, itchy, blistered or peeling.

These can be signs of a serious allergic reaction and may need immediate treatment in hospital.

Information:
Do not drive yourself to A&E.

The person you speak to at 999 will give you advice about what to do.

These are not all the side effects of amoxicillin. For a full list, see the leaflet inside your medicines packet.

Information:
Reporting side effects
You can report any suspected side effect using the Yellow Card safety scheme.

Visit the Yellow Card website for more information about reporting side effects.

6. How to cope with side effects of amoxicillin
What to do about:

feeling sick – stick to simple meals and do not eat rich or spicy food. It might help to take your amoxicillin after a meal or snack.
diarrhoea – drink plenty of fluids, such as water or squash, to avoid dehydration. Signs of dehydration include peeing less than usual or having dark, strong-smelling pee. Do not take any other medicines to treat diarrhoea without speaking to a pharmacist or doctor. If you take the combined contraceptive pill or progestogen-only pill and you have severe diarrhoea for more than 24 hours, your contraceptive pills may not protect you from pregnancy. Check the pill packet to find out what to do.
7. Pregnancy and breastfeeding
Amoxicillin and pregnancy
It is safe to take amoxicillin during pregnancy.

Amoxicillin and breastfeeding
It is OK to take amoxicillin while breastfeeding. Information shows that only tiny amounts of amoxicillin get into breast milk. Such levels would not be expected to cause side effects in your baby.

Talk to your doctor, pharmacist, health visitor or midwife if:

your baby is not feeding as well as usual
they have sickness or diarrhoea
your baby has oral thrush, or a skin rash
you have any other concerns about your baby
For more information about how amoxicillin can affect you and your baby during pregnancy, visit the Best Use of Medicines in Pregnancy (BUMPS) website.

8. Cautions with other medicines
There are some medicines that do not mix well with amoxicillin.

Tell your doctor if you're taking any of these medicines before you start taking amoxicillin:

methotrexate, used to treat arthritis and psoriasis
warfarin, a medicine to prevent blood clots
gout medicines called probenecid or allopurinol
other antibiotics
Tell your doctor if you've recently had, or are due to have, an oral typhoid vaccine. Amoxicillin can make it less effective.

Mixing amoxicillin with herbal remedies and supplements
There is little information about taking herbal remedies and supplements alongside amoxicillin.

Important:Medicine safety
Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you're taking any other medicines, including herbal medicines, vitamins or supplements.


About anastrozole
-Brand name: Arimidex
Anastrozole is a medicine that works by lowering the level of oestrogen (a hormone) in your body.

It's mainly prescribed for women who have been through the menopause and have a type of cancer called hormone-dependent breast cancer.

Most people who take anastrozole will have had surgery, radiotherapy or sometimes chemotherapy to treat their breast cancer first. Anastrozole is an additional (adjuvant) treatment which helps stop the cancer coming back.

It can also be used:

to prevent breast cancer if you're high risk and have been through the menopause
to treat breast cancer in men
to treat breast cancer in younger women before the menopause
Anastrozole is available on prescription only. It comes as tablets.

Key facts
You usually take anastrozole once a day. Try to take it at the same time each day, as this makes it easier to remember.
Most people take anastrozole for 5 years. It's important to complete your course of treatment.
Common side effects include symptoms similar to the menopause such as hot flushes, difficulty sleeping, tiredness and low mood. They usually improve after a few months.
Your doctor will monitor your cholesterol levels and bone density during your treatment.
If anastrozole makes you feel tired or dizzy, do not drive a car, ride a bike, or use tools or machinery until you feel better.



Antacids
Antacids are medicines that counteract (neutralise) the acid in your stomach to relieve indigestion and heartburn.

They come as a liquid or chewable tablets and can be bought from pharmacies and shops without a prescription.

When antacids are used
Antacids may help if you have:

indigestion
heartburn, acid reflux or gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD)
a stomach ulcer
gastritis (inflammation of the stomach lining)
They can quickly relieve your symptoms for a few hours. But they do not treat the underlying cause and long-term use is not recommended.

Speak to a GP if you find you need to take antacids regularly.

Common types of antacids
Many different types of antacid are available. Some are sold under a brand name and others are named after their main ingredient. Brands include Gaviscon (alginic acid) and Pepto-Bismol (bismuth subsalicylate).

Ingredients to look for include:

aluminium hydroxide
magnesium carbonate
magnesium trisilicate
magnesium hydroxide
calcium carbonate
sodium bicarbonate
Some antacids also contain other medicines, such as an alginate (which coats your gullet with a protective layer) and simeticone (which reduces flatulence).

How and when to take antacids
Check the instructions on the packet or leaflet to see how much antacid to take and how often. This depends on the exact medicine you're taking.

Antacids should be used when you have symptoms or think you will get them soon – for most people, the best time to take them is with or soon after meals, and just before going to bed.

Remember that doses for children may be lower than for adults.

Contact a GP or pharmacist, or call NHS 111, if you take too much of the medicine and start to feel unwell.

Taking antacids with food, alcohol and other medicines
It's best to take antacids with food or soon after eating because this is when you're most likely to get indigestion or heartburn.

The effect of the medicine may also last longer if taken with food.

Antacids can affect how well other medicines work, so do not take other medicines within 2 to 4 hours of taking an antacid.

You can drink alcohol while taking antacids, but alcohol can irritate your stomach and make your symptoms worse.

Side effects of antacids
Antacids do not usually have many side effects if they're only taken occasionally and at the recommended dose.

But sometimes they can cause:

diarrhoea or constipation
flatulence (wind)
stomach cramps
feeling sick or vomiting
These should pass once you stop taking the medicine.

Speak to a pharmacist or a GP if side effects do not improve or are troublesome. You may need to switch to another medicine.

Who may not be able to take antacids
Antacids are safe for most people to take, but they're not suitable for everyone.

Speak to a pharmacist or a GP for advice first if you:

are pregnant or breastfeeding – most antacids are considered safe to take while pregnant or breastfeeding, but always get advice first
are looking for a medicine for a child under 12 years of age – some antacids are not recommended for children
have liver disease, kidney disease or heart failure – some antacids may not be safe if you have one of these problems
have an illness that means you need to control how much salt (sodium) is in your diet, such as high blood pressure or cirrhosis – some antacids contain high levels of sodium, which could make you unwell
are taking other medicines – antacids can interfere with other medicines and may need be avoided or taken at a different time


*****ANTIBIOTICS

Antibiotics are used to treat or prevent some types of bacterial infection. They work by killing bacteria or preventing them from spreading. But they do not work for everything.

Many mild bacterial infections get better on their own without using antibiotics.

Antibiotics do not work for viral infections such as colds and flu, and most coughs.

Antibiotics are no longer routinely used to treat:

chest infections
ear infections in children
sore throats
When it comes to antibiotics, take your doctor's advice on whether you need them or not. Antibiotic resistance is a big problem – taking antibiotics when you do not need them can mean they will not work for you in the future.

When antibiotics are needed
Antibiotics may be used to treat bacterial infections that:

are unlikely to clear up without antibiotics
could take too long to clear without treatment
carry a risk of more serious complications
could infect others
You may still be infectious after starting a course of antibiotics. Depending on the infection and how it's treated, it can take between 48 hours and 14 days to stop being infectious. Ask a GP or pharmacist for advice.

People at a high risk of infection may also be given antibiotics as a precaution, known as antibiotic prophylaxis.

Read more about when antibiotics are used and why antibiotics are not routinely used to treat infections.

How to take antibiotics
Take antibiotics as directed on the packet or the patient information leaflet that comes with the medicine, or as instructed by your GP or pharmacist.

Antibiotics can come as:

tablets, capsules or a liquid that you drink – these can be used to treat most types of mild to moderate infections in the body
creams, lotions, sprays and drops – these are often used to treat skin infections and eye or ear infections
injections – these can be given as an injection or through a drip directly into the blood or muscle, and are used for more serious infections
Missing a dose of antibiotics
If you forget to take a dose of your antibiotics, check the patient information leaflet that came with your medicine to find out what to do. If you're not sure, speak to a pharmacist or a GP.

In most cases, you can take the dose you missed as soon as you remember and then continue to take your course of antibiotics as normal.

But if it's almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.

Accidentally taking an extra dose
There's an increased risk of side effects if you take 2 doses closer together than recommended.

Accidentally taking 1 extra dose of your antibiotic is unlikely to cause you any serious harm.

But it will increase your chances of getting side effects, such as pain in your stomach, diarrhoea, and feeling or being sick.

If you accidentally take more than 1 extra dose of your antibiotic, are worried or you get severe side effects, speak to your GP or call NHS 111 as soon as possible.

Side effects of antibiotics
As with any medicine, antibiotics can cause side effects. Most antibiotics do not cause problems if they're used properly and serious side effects are rare.

The common side effects include:

being sick
feeling sick
bloating and indigestion
diarrhoea
Some people may have an allergic reaction to antibiotics, especially penicillin and another type of antibiotic called cephalosporins.

In very rare cases, this can lead to a serious allergic reaction (anaphylaxis), which is a medical emergency.

Call 999 or go to A&E now if:

you get a skin rash that may include itchy, red, swollen, blistered or peeling skin
you're wheezing
you get tightness in the chest or throat
you have trouble breathing or talking
your mouth, face, lips, tongue or throat start swelling
You could be having a serious allergic reaction and may need immediate treatment in hospital.

Read more about the side effects of antibiotics.

Considerations and interactions
Some antibiotics are not suitable for people with certain medical problems, or women who are pregnant or breastfeeding.

Tell your healthcare professional if you're pregnant or breastfeeding so they can prescribe the most suitable antibiotic for you.

Only ever take antibiotics prescribed for you – never "borrow" them from a friend or family member.

Some antibiotics do not mix well with other medicines, such as the contraceptive pill and alcohol.

Read the information leaflet that comes with your medicine carefully and discuss any concerns with your pharmacist or GP.

Read more about how antibiotics interact with other medicines.

Types of antibiotics
There are hundreds of different types of antibiotics, but most of them can be classified into 6 groups.

Penicillins (such as penicillin, amoxicillin, co-amoxiclav, flucloxacillin and phenoxymethylpenicillin) – widely used to treat a variety of infections, including skin infections, chest infections and urinary tract infections
Cephalosporins (such as cefalexin) – used to treat a wide range of infections, but some are also effective for treating more serious infections, such as sepsis and meningitis
Aminoglycosides (such as gentamicin and tobramycin) – tend to only be used in hospital to treat very serious illnesses such as sepsis, as they can cause serious side effects, including hearing loss and kidney damage; they're usually given by injection, but may be given as drops for some ear or eye infections
Tetracyclines (such as tetracycline, doxycycline and lymecycline) – can be used to treat a wide range of infections, but are commonly used to treat acne and a skin condition called rosacea
Macrolides (such as azithromycin, erythromycin and clarithromycin) – can be particularly useful for treating lung and chest infections, or as an alternative for people with a penicillin allergy, or to treat penicillin-resistant strains of bacteria
Fluoroquinolones (such as ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin) – are broad-spectrum antibiotics that were once used to treat a wide range of infections, especially respiratory and urinary tract infections; these antibiotics are no longer used routinely because of the risk of serious side effects
Other antibiotics include chloramphenicol (used for eye and ear infections), fusidic acid (used for skin and eye infections), and nitrofurantoin and trimethoprim (used for urinary tract infections).


Antibiotics are used to treat or prevent some types of bacterial infections. They're not effective against viral infections, such as the common cold or flu.

Antibiotics should only be prescribed to treat health problems:

that are not serious but are unlikely to clear up without antibiotics – such as acne
that are not serious but could spread to other people if not promptly treated – such as the skin infection impetigo or the sexually transmitted infection chlamydia
where evidence suggests that antibiotics could significantly speed up recovery – such as a kidney infection
that carry a risk of more serious complications – such as cellulitis or pneumonia
Learn about antibiotic resistance and why antibiotics are no longer routinely used to treat infections.

People at risk of bacterial infections
Antibiotics may also be recommended for people who are more vulnerable to the harmful effects of infection. This may include:

people aged over 75 years
babies less than 72 hours old who have a bacterial infection, or a higher than average risk of developing one
people with heart failure
people who have to take insulin for diabetes
people with a weakened immune system – either because of an underlying health condition such as HIV or as a side effect of certain treatments, such as chemotherapy
Antibiotics to prevent infection
Antibiotics are sometimes given as a precaution to prevent, rather than treat, an infection. This is called antibiotic prophylaxis. Situations where antibiotics are given as a preventive treatment include:

if you're having an operation
after a bite or wound that could get infected
if you have a health problem that means you're at higher risk of infection, such as if you've had your spleen removed or you're having chemotherapy treatment
If you're having an operation
Antibiotics are normally recommended if you're having a type of surgery that carries a high risk of infection.

For example, you may be prescribed antibiotics if you're going to have:

some types of eye surgery – such as cataract surgery or glaucoma surgery
joint replacement surgery
breast enlargement surgery
pacemaker surgery
surgery to remove the gallbladder
surgery to remove the appendix
Your surgical team will be able to tell you if you need antibiotics.

Bites or wounds
Antibiotics may be recommended for a wound that has a high chance of becoming infected – this could be an animal or human bite, for example, or a wound that has come into contact with soil or faeces.

Medical conditions
Some people are particularly vulnerable to infection, making antibiotics necessary. They include:

people who have had their spleen removed
people having chemotherapy for cancer
people with sickle cell anaemia
In some cases, antibiotics are prescribed for people who have an infection that keeps coming back or that's causing distress or an increased risk of complications, such as: 

cellulitis
urinary tract infections
genital herpes
rheumatic fever


Antibiotics can have side effects such as diarrhoea and feeling sick.

These side effects are usually mild and should pass once you finish your course of treatment.

If you get any additional side effects, contact your GP or the doctor in charge of your care for advice.

Antibiotic allergic reactions
Rarely, some people may have an allergic reaction to antibiotics, especially penicillin and cephalosporins.

In most cases, the allergic reaction is mild to moderate and can take the form of:

a raised, itchy skin rash (urticaria, or hives)
coughing
wheezing
tightness of the throat, which can cause breathing difficulties
These mild to moderate allergic reactions can usually be successfully treated by taking antihistamines.

But if you're concerned, or your symptoms do not get better with treatment, call your GP for advice. If you cannot contact your GP, call NHS 111.

In rare cases, an antibiotic can cause a severe and potentially life-threatening allergic reaction known as anaphylaxis.

Call 999 or go to A&E now if:

you have a skin rash that may include itchy, red, swollen, blistered or peeling skin
you're wheezing
you have tightness in your chest or throat
you have trouble breathing or talking
your mouth, face, lips, tongue or throat start swelling
You could be having a serious allergic reaction and may need immediate treatment in hospital.

Tetracyclines and sensitivity to light
Tetracyclines can make your skin sensitive to sunlight and artificial sources of light, such as sun lamps and sunbeds.

Avoid prolonged exposure to bright light while taking these medicines.

Fluoroquinolones
Severe aches and pains
In very rare cases, fluoroquinolone antibiotics can cause disabling, long-lasting or permanent side effects affecting the joints, muscles and nervous system.

Stop taking fluoroquinolone treatment straight away and see your GP if you get a serious side effect including:

tendon, muscle or joint pain – usually in the knee, elbow or shoulder
tingling, numbness or pins and needles
Heart problems
Fluoroquinolone antibiotics can cause serious side effects in people who are at risk of heart valve problems.

Stop taking fluoroquinolone treatment straight away and see your GP if you get a serious side effect including:

swollen ankles, feet and legs (oedema)
new heart palpitations (heartbeats that suddenly become more noticeable)
sudden shortness of breath
Reporting side effects
The Yellow Card Scheme allows you to report suspected side effects from any type of medicine you're taking.

It's run by a medicines safety watchdog called the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA).

Antibiotics can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances. This means it can have an effect that is different to what you expected.

If you want to check that your medicines are safe to take with your antibiotics, ask your GP or local pharmacist.

Some antibiotics need to be taken with food, while others need to be taken on an empty stomach. Always read the patient information leaflet that comes with your medicine.

Alcohol
It's a good idea to avoid drinking alcohol when taking medicine or feeling unwell.

But it's unlikely that drinking alcohol in moderation will cause problems if you're taking the most common antibiotics.

However, some antibiotics can have side effects such as feeling sick or dizzy, which might be made worse by drinking alcohol.

Ask your GP or pharmacist if you're unsure whether you can drink alcohol while taking antibiotics.

Metronidazole and tinidazole
It's best to completely avoid alcohol while taking:

metronidazole – an antibiotic sometimes used for dental or vaginal infections, skin infections, infected leg ulcers and pressure sores
tinidazole – an antibiotic sometimes used to treat many of the same infections as metronidazole, as well as to help clear bacteria called Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) from the gut
Continue to avoid alcohol for 48 hours after you stop taking metronidazole and 72 hours after you stop taking tinidazole.

Drinking alcohol with metronidazole or tinidazole can cause very unpleasant side effects, such as:

feeling and being sick
stomach pain
hot flushes
a fast or irregular heartbeat
headaches
feeling dizzy
feeling drowsy
Other antibiotics
It may be best to avoid drinking alcohol if you're taking:

linezolid – this medicine can be affected by undistilled (fermented) alcoholic drinks, such as wine, beer, sherry and lager
doxycycline – alcohol can affect this medicine, and it may also be less effective in people with a history of drinking heavily
The contraceptive pill
Some antibiotics, such as rifampicin and rifabutin, can reduce the effectiveness of the combined contraceptive pill.

If you're prescribed rifampicin or rifabutin, you may need to use additional contraception, such as condoms, while taking antibiotics. Speak to your GP, nurse or pharmacist for advice.

Mixing medicines
Some antibiotics do not mix well with certain medicines and herbal supplements.

You may be prescribed a different antibiotic or told to stop taking some medicines or herbal supplements.

Always read the patient information leaflet that comes with your medicine and tell your doctor if you're taking any medicines or herbal remedies.

Antibiotics are no longer routinely used to treat infections.

This is because:

many infections are caused by viruses, so antibiotics are not effective
antibiotics are often unlikely to speed up the healing process and can cause side effects
the more antibiotics are used to treat trivial conditions, the more likely they are to become ineffective for treating more serious conditions
Both the NHS and health organisations across the world are trying to reduce the use of antibiotics, especially for health problems that are not serious.

For example, antibiotics are no longer routinely used to treat:

chest infections
ear infections in children
sore throats
Antibiotic resistance and 'superbugs'
The overuse of antibiotics in recent years means they're becoming less effective and has led to the emergence of "superbugs".

These are strains of bacteria that have developed resistance to many different types of antibiotics, including:

MRSA (methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus)
Clostridium difficile (C. diff)
the bacteria that cause multi-drug-resistant tuberculosis
These types of infections can be serious and challenging to treat, and are becoming an increasing cause of disability and death across the world.

The biggest worry is that new strains of bacteria may emerge that cannot be treated by any existing antibiotics.

Anticoagulants are medicines that help prevent blood clots. They're given to people at a high risk of getting clots, to reduce their chances of developing serious conditions such as strokes and heart attacks.

A blood clot is a seal created by the blood to stop bleeding from wounds. While they're useful in stopping bleeding, they can block blood vessels and stop blood flowing to organs such as the brain, heart or lungs if they form in the wrong place.

Anticoagulants work by interrupting the process involved in the formation of blood clots. They're sometimes called "blood-thinning" medicines, although they don't actually make the blood thinner.

Although they're used for similar purposes, anticoagulants are different to antiplatelet medicines, such as low-dose aspirin and clopidogrel.

Types of anticoagulants
A commonly prescribed anticoagulant is warfarin.

Newer types of anticoagulants, sometimes called direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs), are also commonly used. These are:

rivaroxaban
dabigatran
apixaban
edoxaban
Warfarin and the newer alternatives are taken as tablets or capsules. There's also an anticoagulant called heparin that can be given by injection. Read more about heparin on the Electronic Medicines Compendium (EMC) website.

When anticoagulants are used
If a blood clot blocks the flow of blood through a blood vessel, the affected part of the body will become starved of oxygen and will stop working properly.

Depending on where the clot forms, this can lead to serious problems such as:

strokes or transient ischaemic attacks ("mini-strokes")
heart attacks
deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
pulmonary embolism
Treatment with anticoagulants may be recommended if your doctor feels you're at an increased risk of developing one of these problems. This may be because you've had blood clots in the past or you've been diagnosed with a condition such as atrial fibrillation that can cause blood clots to form.

You may also be prescribed an anticoagulant if you've recently had surgery, as the period of rest and inactivity you need during your recovery can increase your risk of developing a blood clot.

Read more about when anticoagulants are used.

How to take anticoagulants
Your doctor or nurse should tell you how much of your anticoagulant medicine to take and when to take it. 

Most people need to take their tablets or capsules once or twice a day with water or food.

The length of time you need to keep taking your medicine for depends on why it's been prescribed. In many cases, treatment will be lifelong.

If you're unsure how to take your medicine, or are worried that you missed a dose or have taken too much, check the patient information leaflet that comes with it or ask your GP, anticoagulant clinic or pharmacist what to do. You can also call NHS 111 for advice.

Read more about anticoagulant dosage.

Things to consider when taking anticoagulants
There are several things you need to be aware of when taking anticoagulant medicines.

If you're going to have surgery or a test such as an endoscopy, make sure your doctor or surgeon is aware that you're taking anticoagulants, as you may have to stop taking them for a short time.

Speak to your GP, anticoagulant clinic or pharmacist before taking any other medicines, including prescription and over-the-counter medicines, as some medicines can affect how your anticoagulant works.

If you're taking warfarin, you'll also need to avoid making significant changes to what you normally eat and drink, as this can affect your medicine.

Most anticoagulant medicines aren't suitable for pregnant women. Speak to your GP or anticoagulant clinic if you become pregnant or are planning to try for a baby while taking anticoagulants.

Read more about things to consider when taking anticoagulants.

Side effects of anticoagulants
Like all medicines, there's a risk of experiencing side effects while taking anticoagulants.

The main side effect is that you can bleed too easily, which can cause problems such as:

passing blood in your urine
passing blood when you poo or having black poo
severe bruising
prolonged nosebleeds
bleeding gums
vomiting blood or coughing up blood
heavy periods in women
For most people, the benefits of taking anticoagulants will outweigh the risk of excessive bleeding.

Overview - Antidepressants
Antidepressants are a type of medicine used to treat clinical depression.

They can also be used to treat a number of other conditions, including:

obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)
generalised anxiety disorder
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
Antidepressants are also sometimes used to treat people with long-term (chronic) pain.

Read more about when antidepressants are used.

How antidepressants work
It's not known exactly how antidepressants work.

It's thought they work by increasing levels of chemicals in the brain called neurotransmitters. Certain neurotransmitters, such as serotonin and noradrenaline, are linked to mood and emotion.

Neurotransmitters may also affect pain signals sent by nerves, which may explain why some antidepressants can help relieve long-term pain.

While antidepressants can treat the symptoms of depression, they do not always address its causes. This is why they're usually used in combination with therapy to treat more severe depression or other mental health conditions.

How effective are antidepressants?
Research suggests that antidepressants can be helpful for people with moderate or severe depression.

They're not usually recommended for mild depression, unless other treatments like talking therapy have not helped.

Doses and duration of treatment
Antidepressants are usually taken in tablet form. When they're prescribed, you'll start on the lowest possible dose thought necessary to improve your symptoms.

Antidepressants usually need to be taken for 1 or 2 weeks (without missing a dose) before the benefit starts to be felt. It's important not to stop taking them if you get some mild side effects early on, as these effects usually wear off quickly.

If you take an antidepressant for 4 weeks without feeling any benefit, speak to your GP or mental health specialist. They may recommend increasing your dose or trying a different medicine.

A course of treatment usually lasts for at least 6 months after you start to feel better. Some people with recurrent depression may be advised to take them indefinitely.

Read more about antidepressant dosages.

Side effects
Different antidepressants can have a range of different side effects. Always check the information leaflet that comes with your medicine to see what the possible side effects are.

The most common side effects of antidepressants are usually mild. Side effects should improve within a few days or weeks of treatment, as the body gets used to the medicine.

Read more about:

possible side effects of antidepressants
cautions and interactions of antidepressants
Coming off antidepressants
Talk to your doctor before you stop taking antidepressants. It's important that you do not stop taking antidepressants suddenly.

Once you're ready to come off antidepressants, your doctor will probably recommend reducing your dose gradually over several weeks – or longer, if you have been taking them for a long time.

This is to help prevent any withdrawal symptoms you might get as a reaction to coming off the medicine.

Read more about stopping or coming off antidepressants.

Types of antidepressants
There are several different types of antidepressants.

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
SSRIs are the most widely prescribed type of antidepressants. They're usually preferred over other antidepressants, as they cause fewer side effects. An overdose is also less likely to be serious.

Fluoxetine is probably the best known SSRI (sold under the brand name Prozac). Other SSRIs include citalopram (Cipramil), escitalopram (Cipralex), paroxetine (Seroxat) and sertraline (Lustral).

Serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs)
SNRIs are similar to SSRIs. They were designed to be a more effective antidepressant than SSRIs. However, the evidence that SNRIs are more effective in treating depression is uncertain. It seems that some people respond better to SSRIs, while others respond better to SNRIs.

Examples of SNRIs include duloxetine (Cymbalta and Yentreve) and venlafaxine (Efexor).

Noradrenaline and specific serotonergic antidepressants (NASSAs)
NASSAs may be effective for some people who are unable to take SSRIs. The side effects of NASSAs are similar to those of SSRIs, but they're thought to cause fewer sexual problems. However, they may also cause more drowsiness at first.

The main NASSA prescribed in the UK is mirtazapine (Zispin).

Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
TCAs are an older type of antidepressant. They're no longer usually recommended as the first treatment for depression because they can be more dangerous if an overdose is taken. They also cause more unpleasant side effects than SSRIs and SNRIs.

Exceptions are sometimes made for people with severe depression that fail to respond to other treatments. TCAs may also be recommended for other mental health conditions, such as OCD and bipolar disorder.

Examples of TCAs include amitriptyline, clomipramine, dosulepin, imipramine, lofepramine and nortriptyline.

Some types of TCAs, such as amitriptyline, can also be used to treat chronic nerve pain.

Serotonin antagonists and reuptake inhibitors (SARIs)
SARIs are not usually the first choice of antidepressant, but they may be prescribed if other antidepressants have not worked or have caused side effects.

The main SARI prescribed in the UK is trazodone (Molipaxin).

Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)
MAOIs are an older type of antidepressant that are rarely used nowadays.

They can cause potentially serious side effects so should only be prescribed by a specialist doctor.

Examples of MAOIs include tranylcypromine, phenelzine and isocarboxazid.

Other treatments for depression
Other treatments for depression include talking therapies such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT).

People with moderate to severe depression are usually treated using a combination of antidepressants and CBT. Antidepressants work quickly in reducing symptoms, whereas CBT takes time to deal with causes of depression and ways of overcoming it.

Regular exercise has also been shown to be useful for those with mild depression.

Read more about alternatives to antidepressants.

Yellow Card Scheme
The Yellow Card Scheme allows you to report suspected side effects from any type of medicine you're taking. It's run by a medicines safety watchdog called the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA).

Antifungal medicines
Antifungal medicines are used to treat fungal infections, which most commonly affect your skin, hair and nails.

You can get some antifungal medicines from a pharmacy without needing a GP prescription.

Infections antifungals can treat
Fungal infections commonly treated with antifungals include:

ringworm
athlete's foot
fungal nail infection
vaginal thrush
some types of severe dandruff
Some fungal infections can grow inside the body and need to be treated in hospital.

Examples include:

aspergillosis, which affects the lungs
fungal meningitis, which affects the brain
You're more at risk of getting one of these more serious fungal infections if you have a weakened immune system – for example, if you're taking medicines to suppress your immune system.

Types of antifungal medicines
You can get antifungal medicines as:

a cream, gel, ointment or spray
a capsule, tablet or liquid
an injection
a pessary: a small and soft tablet you put inside the vagina
Common names for antifungal medicines include:

clotrimazole (Canesten)
econazole
miconazole
terbinafine (Lamisil)
fluconazole (Diflucan)
ketoconazole (Daktarin)
nystatin (Nystan)
amphotericin
How antifungal medicines work
Antifungal medicines work by either:

killing the fungus
preventing the fungus from growing
When to see a pharmacist or GP
See a pharmacist or GP if you think you have a fungal infection. They can advise you on which antifungal medicine is best for you.

If you take too much antifungal medicine, call 111 or speak to a pharmacist or GP.

If you're advised to go to hospital, take the medicine's packaging with you so the healthcare professionals who treat you know what you've taken.

Things to consider when using antifungal medicines
Before taking antifungal medicines, speak to a pharmacist or GP about:

any existing conditions or allergies that may affect your treatment for fungal infection
the possible side effects of antifungal medicines
whether the antifungal medicine may interact with other medicines you may already be taking
whether your antifungal medicine is suitable to take during pregnancy or while breastfeeding – many are not suitable
You can also check the patient information leaflet that comes with your antifungal medicine for more information.

Side effects of antifungal medicines
Antifungal medicines may cause side effects. These are usually mild and do not last long.

They can include:

itching or burning
redness
feeling sick
tummy (abdominal) pain
diarrhoea
a rash
Occasionally, antifungal medicines may cause a more severe reaction, such as:

an allergic reaction – your face, neck or tongue may swell and you may have difficulty breathing
a severe skin reaction – such as peeling or blistering skin
liver damage (very rarely) – you may have loss of appetite, vomiting, nausea, jaundice, dark pee or pale poo, tiredness or weakness
Stop using the medicine if you have these severe side effects, and see a GP or pharmacist to find an alternative.

If you're having difficulty breathing, go to A&E or call 999.

Reporting side effects
If you think a medicine has made you unwell, you can report this side effect through the Yellow Card Scheme.

Antifungal medicines for children
Some antifungal medicines can be used to treat children and babies – for example, miconazole oral gel can be used for oral thrush in babies.

But different doses are usually needed for children of different ages. Speak to a pharmacist or GP for more advice.

Antihistamines
Antihistamines are medicines often used to relieve symptoms of allergies, such as hay fever, hives, conjunctivitis and reactions to insect bites or stings.

They're also sometimes used to prevent motion sickness, to treat feeling sick (nausea) or being sick (vomiting), and as a short-term treatment for insomnia.

Most antihistamines can be bought from pharmacies and shops, but some are only available on prescription.

Types of antihistamine
There are many types of antihistamine.

They're usually divided into 2 main groups:

antihistamines that make you feel sleepy – such as chlorphenamine (Piriton), cinnarizine, diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine and promethazine
non-drowsy antihistamines that are less likely to make you feel sleepy – such as acrivastine, cetirizine, fexofenadine and loratadine
They also come in several different forms – including tablets, capsules, liquids, syrups, creams, lotions, gels, eyedrops and nasal sprays.

Which type is best?
There's not much evidence to suggest any particular antihistamine is better than any other at relieving allergy symptoms.

Some people find certain types work well for them and others do not. You may need to try several types to find one that works for you.

Non-drowsy antihistamines are generally the best option, as they're less likely to make you feel sleepy. But types that make you feel sleepy may be better if your symptoms stop you sleeping.

Ask a pharmacist for advice if you're unsure which medicine to try as not all antihistamines are suitable for everyone.

How to take antihistamines
Take your medicine as advised by the pharmacist or doctor, or as described in the leaflet that comes with it.

Before taking an antihistamine, you should know:

how to take it – including whether it needs to be taken with water or food, or how to use it correctly (if eyedrops or a nasal spray)
how much to take (the dose) – this can vary depending on things such as your age and weight
when to take it – including how many times a day you can take it and when to take it (some types should be taken before bedtime)
how long to take it for – some types can be used for a long time, but some are only recommended for a few days
what to do if you miss a dose or take too much (overdose)
The advice varies depending on the exact medicine you're taking. If you're not sure how to take your medicine, ask a pharmacist.

Side effects of antihistamines
Like all medicines, antihistamines can cause side effects.

Side effects of antihistamines that make you drowsy can include:

sleepiness (drowsiness) and reduced co-ordination, reaction speed and judgement – do not drive or use machinery after taking these antihistamines
dry mouth
blurred vision
difficulty peeing
Side effects of non-drowsy antihistamines can include:

headache
dry mouth
feeling sick
drowsiness – this is less common with non-drowsy antihistamines but is still possible
Check the leaflet that comes with your medicine for a full list of possible side effects and advice about when to get medical help.

If you think your medicine has caused an unwanted side effect, you can report it through the Yellow Card Scheme.

Taking antihistamines with other medicines, food or alcohol
Speak to a pharmacist or GP before taking antihistamines if you're already taking other medicines.

There may be a risk the medicines do not mix, which could stop either from working properly or increase the risk of side effects.

Examples of medicines that could cause problems if taken with antihistamines include some types of:

antidepressants
stomach ulcer or indigestion medicines
cough and cold remedies that also contain an antihistamine
Try not to drink alcohol while taking an antihistamine, particularly if it's a type that makes you drowsy, as it can increase the chances of it making you feel sleepy.

Food and other drinks do not affect most antihistamines, but check the leaflet that comes with your medicine to make sure.

Who can take antihistamines
Most people can safely take antihistamines.

But speak to a pharmacist or GP for advice if you:

are pregnant or breastfeeding
are looking for a medicine for a young child
are an older person
are taking other medicines 
have an underlying health condition, such as heart disease, liver disease, kidney disease or epilepsy
Some antihistamines may not be suitable in these cases. A pharmacist or doctor can recommend one that's best for you.

Loratadine is usually recommended if you need to take an antihistamine in pregnancy. Loratadine or cetirizine are usually OK to take while breastfeeding.

Always check the leaflet that comes with your medicine to see if it's safe for you before taking it or giving it to your child.

How antihistamines work
Antihistamines block the effects of a substance called histamine in your body.

Histamine is normally released when your body detects something harmful, such as an infection. It causes blood vessels to expand and the skin to swell, which helps protect the body.

But in people with allergies, the body mistakes something harmless – such as pollen, animal hair or house dust – for a threat and produces histamine. The histamine causes an allergic reaction with unpleasant symptoms including itchy, watering eyes, a running or blocked nose, sneezing and skin rashes.

Antihistamines help stop this happening if you take them before you come into contact with the substance you're allergic to. Or they can reduce the severity of symptoms if you take them afterwards.

Find out more about your medicine
The leaflet that comes in the packet with your medicine will have detailed information about it, including how to take it and what side effects you might get.

If you no longer have the leaflet that came with your medicine, you can search for an online version of it using our medicines A to Z.

You may also find information on individual antihistamines on these websites:

Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA): patient information leaflets
Electronic Medicines Compendium

About apixaban
Apixaban is a type of medicine known as an anticoagulant.

It makes your blood flow through your veins more easily, which means your blood is less likely to make blood clots.

It's used to treat people who have had a health problem caused by a blood clot, such as:

a blood clot in the leg (deep vein thrombosis, or DVT)
a blood clot in the lungs (pulmonary embolism)
It's also used to prevent blood clots if you're at high risk of having them in the future.

People who are at high risk include those who:

have previously had a stroke or transient ischaemic attack (TIA)
have an irregular heartbeat (atrial fibrillation)
have heart failure
have recently had surgery to replace a hip or knee joint
Apixaban is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets.

Key facts
You'll usually take apixaban twice a day.
You can take it with or without food.
The most common side effect of apixaban is bleeding more easily than normal, such as having nosebleeds, heavier periods, bleeding gums and bruising.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you an anticoagulant alert card. Always carry this with you. Show it to your doctor or dentist before you have surgery or dental treatment. It's important they know you're taking apixaban, as it may put you at risk of bleeding.
You can drink alcohol while taking apixaban. But heavy drinking, especially binge drinking, can increase the effect of apixaban and make you more likely to bleed.

About aripiprazole
-Brand name: Abilify
Aripiprazole is a medicine that helps with mental health conditions such as:

schizophrenia, where you may see, hear or feel things that are not there, believe things that are not true, feel unusually suspicious, or have muddled thoughts
the mania symptoms of bipolar disorder, where your mood changes from feeling highly excited (mania) to feeling very low (depression)
It's an antipsychotic medicine that works by affecting chemicals in your brain such as dopamine and serotonin. It does not cure your condition, but it can help with the symptoms.

Aripiprazole is only available on prescription.

It comes as tablets, including tablets that melt in your mouth (orodispersible tablets), and a liquid that you swallow. It can also be given as an injection.

Key facts
Aripiprazole does not work straight away. It can take several days or even weeks for some of your symptoms to start to get better.
You can take aripiprazole tablets or liquid with or without food. Try to take it around the same time each day.
Common side effects include difficulty sleeping, feeling anxious and restless, headaches and constipation.
Aripiprazole can affect your impulse control, so you may find you have urges to do things like gambling, spending too much or eating too much, or you may have an increased sex drive. Speak to your doctor if you notice these types of changes in your behaviour.
Aripiprazole may make you lose weight or put on weight. If you find it makes you feel more hungry than usual, eating a healthy, balanced diet will help prevent problems with your weight.
It's best not to drink alcohol while taking aripiprazole. Drinking alcohol with aripiprazole can make you feel sleepy or unsteady, and can make your symptoms worse.

About aspirin for pain relief
-Brand names: Anadin, Bonjela gel
Aspirin is an everyday painkiller for aches and pains such as headache, toothache and period pain. It can also be used to treat colds and flu-like symptoms, and to bring down a high temperature.

Aspirin is known as an acetylsalicylic acid. It also belongs to a group of medicines called non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).

Aspirin combined with other ingredients is also available in some cold and flu remedies.

You can buy most types of aspirin from pharmacies, shops and supermarkets. Some types are only available on prescription.

Aspirin comes as tablets or suppositories – medicine that you push gently into your anus (bottom). It also comes as a gel for mouth ulcers and cold sores.

If you've had a stroke or heart attack, or are at high risk of a heart attack, your doctor may recommend that you take a daily low-dose aspirin. Some women may also be prescribed low-dose aspirin while they’re pregnant.

This is different to taking aspirin for pain relief. Only take low-dose aspirin if your doctor recommends it. Read our information on low-dose aspirin.

Key facts
It's best to take aspirin with food. That way, you'll be less likely to get an upset stomach or stomach ache.
Never give aspirin to children under the age of 16 (unless their doctor prescribes it). It can make children more likely to develop a very rare but serious condition called Reye's syndrome.
You should start to feel better 20 to 30 minutes after taking aspirin.
Aspirin is an ingredient in combined medicines such as Anadin Original, Anadin Extra, Alka-Seltzer Original, Alka-Seltzer XS and Beechams Powders.
Aspirin as a mouth gel has the brand name Bonjela. Like other aspirin products, it's only for people aged 16 and over. Bonjela Teething Gel and Bonjela Junior Gel do not contain aspirin, so you can give them to children under 16.

About low-dose aspirin
Low-dose aspirin helps to prevent heart attacks and strokes in people who are at high risk of them. Aspirin is also known as acetylsalicylic acid.

Your doctor may suggest that you take a daily low dose if you have had a stroke or a heart attack to help stop you having another one.

Or, if you're at high risk of heart attack – for example, if you have had heart surgery or if you have chest pain (angina) caused by heart disease.

If you’re pregnant, you may be recommended to take low-dose aspirin if:

you’re at risk of high blood pressure (pre-eclampsia)
you have underlying medical conditions where you have been advised to take low dose aspirin
you have had several miscarriages or complications in a previous pregnancy
Only take daily low-dose aspirin if your doctor recommends it.

Low-dose aspirin comes as tablets, including tablets that dissolve in a drink of water (soluble) and tablets with a special coating (enteric coated/gastro-resistant) to help to protect your stomach.

It's available on prescription. You can also buy it from pharmacies. However, if you’re pregnant, or having fertility treatment, low-dose aspirin will need to be prescribed by your doctor, a pregnancy specialist (obstetrician) or a midwife.

Children are sometimes treated with low-dose aspirin after heart surgery or to treat a rare condition called Kawasaki disease. Children should only take low-dose aspirin if a doctor prescribes it.

Taking low-dose aspirin to prevent heart attacks and strokes is not the same as taking aspirin for pain relief.

Key facts
Daily low-dose aspirin makes your blood less sticky and helps to prevent heart attacks and stroke.
You’ll usually take a dose of 75mg once a day. Sometimes, doses are higher.
It's best to take low-dose aspirin with food so it does not upset your stomach.
Only take low-dose aspirin if your doctor or midwife recommends it, especially if you are pregnant or breastfeeding.
Carry on taking daily low-dose aspirin even if you feel well, as you'll still be getting the benefits.

About atenolol
Atenolol is a beta blocker medicine, used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension) and irregular heartbeats (arrhythmia).

If you have high blood pressure, taking atenolol helps prevent future heart disease, heart attacks and strokes.

It can also be used to prevent chest pain caused by angina.

Atenolol works by slowing down your heart rate, making it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body.

Atenolol is sometimes prescribed to prevent migraines and help with anxiety.

This medicine is only available on prescription.

It comes as tablets or as a liquid that you swallow. It can also be given as an injection, but this is usually done in hospital.

Atenolol can also be mixed with other medicines such as nifedipine (brand name Tenif). It it's mixed with chlortalidone it's called co-tenidone or by the brand names Tenoret or Tenoertic.

Key facts
Atenolol can make you feel dizzy, sick or tired and can cause diarrhoea. These side effects are usually mild and do not last long.
Your very first dose of atenolol may make you feel dizzy, so take it at bedtime. After that, if you do not feel dizzy, you can take it in the morning.
If you're taking atenolol for high blood pressure it may not make you feel any different. This does not mean it's not working, so it's important to keep taking your medicine.
If atenolol makes you feel dizzy, do not drive a car, ride a bike, or use tools or machinery until you feel better.
Do not stop taking atenolol suddenly, especially if you have heart disease. This can make your condition worse.


About atorvastatin
Atorvastatin belongs to a group of medicines called statins. It is used to lower cholesterol if you've been diagnosed with high blood cholesterol and prevent heart disease, including heart attacks and strokes.

Your doctor may also prescribe atorvastatin if you have a family history of heart disease, or a long-term health condition such as type 1 or type 2 diabetes or rheumatoid arthritis.

This medicine is available on prescription only. It comes as tablets, including chewable tablets for people who have difficulty swallowing.

Key facts
You'll usually take atorvastatin once a day.
The most common side effects are headaches, feeling sick (nausea), diarrhoea and cold-like symptoms.
Do not take atorvastatin if you're pregnant.
If you take your medicine as your doctor prescribed, your cholesterol levels should drop within 4 weeks. Keep taking atorvastatin even if you feel well, as you will still be getting the benefits. Most people with high cholesterol do not have any symptoms.
Try not to drink more than a litre of grapefruit juice a day. Too much of it can increase the level of atorvastatin in your blood. This can increase the risk of side effects.



About azathioprine
-Brand name: Imuran
Azathioprine is a type of medicine called an immunosuppressant. Immunosuppressants help to calm or control your body's immune system.

This medicine helps treat inflammatory conditions such as:

rheumatoid arthritis
Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis
severe inflammation of the liver, skin or arteries
some blood disorders
If you've had a transplant, taking azathioprine can prevent your body from rejecting your new organ.

Azathioprine is sometimes also used to treat conditions that affect the skin, such as lupus or severe atopic eczema.

Azathioprine is available on prescription only. You'll usually be prescribed this medicine by a specialist doctor.

It comes as tablets. It's also available as an injection, but this is usually only given in hospital.

Key facts
You'll have regular blood tests before and during your treatment to check for any problems with your liver, kidneys or bone marrow.
Depending on why you're taking azathioprine, you'll usually notice an improvement in your condition after a few weeks, but it may be a few months before you see the full effect.
Taking azathioprine can mean you're more likely to get infections. Ask your doctor for urgent advice if you get an infection, such as coronavirus (COVID-19), or if you've been in contact with anyone who has chickenpox or shingles while taking azathioprine.
It's important to have any vaccinations when you're invited. Tell the person giving the vaccine that you take azathioprine, to make sure the vaccine is suitable for you.
Use a sunscreen while taking azathioprine, as this medicine can make your skin more sensitive to sunlight.
It's best not to drink too much alcohol, as azathioprine and alcohol can both affect your liver.


About azithromycin
Azithromycin is an antibiotic medicine.

It's used to treat infections including:

chest infections such as pneumonia
ear, nose and throat and nose infections such as sinus infection (sinusitis)
skin infections
Lyme disease
some sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
It can also be used long-term to prevent chest infections in people who keep getting them.

Azithromycin is from a group of medicines called macrolide antibiotics. Macrolide antibiotics work by killing the bacteria that cause the infection.

Azithromycin is available on prescription as capsules, tablets and a liquid that you swallow. It can also be given by injection, but this is usually only done in hospital.

Key facts
You'll usually take azithromycin once a day. Try to take it at the same time each day.
Take azithromycin capsules at least 1 hour before food or 2 hours after eating. You can take tablets or liquid with or without food.
For most infections you should feel better within a few days, but it's important to finish your full course of medicine.
The most common side effects of azithromycin are feeling or being sick, diarrhoea, headaches, or changes to your sense of taste.
Some people get a fungal infection called thrush after taking a course of antibiotics like azithromycin. Symptoms of thrush in the mouth include redness and itching. Women may get vaginal itching.

Who can and cannot take azithromycin
Who can take azithromycin
Most adults and children can take azithromycin.

Who may not be able to take azithromycin
Azithromycin is not suitable for some people. To make sure it's safe for you, tell your doctor if you have:

ever had an allergic reaction to azithromycin or any other medicine
liver or kidney problems
heart problems, including irregular heartbeats (arrhythmia)
ever had diarrhoea when you have taken antibiotics before
myasthenia gravis – azithromycin can make the symptoms of this muscle-weakening condition worse
diabetes – azithromycin liquid contains sugar

How and when to take azithromycin
Dosage and strength
Azithromycin tablets come as either 250mg or 500mg strengths. The capsules are 250mg. The liquid comes as 200mg in 5ml.

The usual dose is 500mg a day for 3 to 10 days depending on the infection being treated.

For some infections, you'll be given a one-off higher dose of 1g or 2g.

The dose may be lower for children or if you have liver or kidney problems.

Azithromycin is sometimes prescribed long-term to prevent chest infections if you keep getting them. In this case you will usually need to take it 3 times a week, often on a Monday, Wednesday and Friday.

Important
Carry on taking this medicine until the course is completed, even if you feel better. If you stop your treatment early, your infection could come back.

How to take it
You'll usually take azithromycin once a day. Try to take your medicine at the same time each day.

Swallow tablets and capsules whole with a drink of water. If you are taking azithromycin capsules, take them at least 1 hour before food or 2 hours after eating. If you have tablets or liquid, you can take them with or without food.

The liquid can have a bitter aftertaste, so it can be a good idea to offer children a drink of fruit juice afterwards.

Do not take medicines for indigestion 2 hours before or after you take this medicine.

Azithromycin liquid is available for children and people who find it difficult to swallow tablets.

If you, or your child, are taking azithromycin as a liquid, your pharmacist will usually make it up for you. The medicine will come with a syringe or spoon to help you measure the right amount. If you do not have one, ask your pharmacist for one. Do not use a kitchen teaspoon as it will not measure the right amount.

If you forget to take it
If you forget to take a dose, take it as soon as you remember, unless it's nearly time for your next one. In this case, just leave out the missed dose and take your next dose at the usual time.

Never take 2 doses at the same time. Never take an extra dose to make up for a forgotten one.

If you often forget doses, it may help to set an alarm to remind you. You could also ask your pharmacist for other ways to help you remember to take your medicine.

If you take too much
Taking an extra dose of azithromycin is unlikely to harm you or your child. It may, however, increase the chance of temporary side effects, such as feeling or being sick or diarrhoea.

Talk to your pharmacist or doctor if you're worried, or if you or your child take more than 1 extra dose.


Side effects of azithromycin
Like all medicines, azithromycin can cause side effects, although not everyone gets them.

Common side effects
These common side effects of azithromycin happen in more than 1 in 100 people. There are things you can do to help cope with them:

Feeling sick (nausea)
Diarrhoea
Being sick (vomiting)
Losing your appetite
Headaches
Feeling dizzy or tired
Changes to your sense of taste
Keep taking the medicine, but talk to your doctor or pharmacist if these side effects bother you or do not go away.

Serious side effects
Serious side effects are rare and happen in less than 1 in 1,000 people.

Call a doctor or call 111 now if:

you have a faster or irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia)
the whites of your eyes turn yellow, or your skin turns yellow (this may be less noticeable on brown or black skin), or you have pale poo with dark pee – these can be signs of liver or gallbladder problems
you get ringing in your ears (tinnitus), temporary hearing loss, or you feel unsteady on your feet (vertigo)
you have severe pain in your stomach or back – this can be a sign of inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis)
you have diarrhoea (perhaps with muscle cramps) that contains blood or mucus – if you have severe diarrhoea without blood or mucus for more than 4 days you should also speak to a doctor
Immediate action required:Call 999 now if:
you have chest pain – this could be a sign of heart attack
Information:
Do not drive yourself to A&E.

The person you speak to at 999 will give you advice about what to do.

Serious allergic reaction
In rare cases it's possible to have a serious allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) to azithromycin.

Immediate action required:Call 999 now if:
your lips, mouth, throat or tongue suddenly become swollen
you're breathing very fast or struggling to breathe (you may become very wheezy or feel like you're choking or gasping for air)
your throat feels tight or you're struggling to swallow
your skin, tongue or lips turn blue, grey or pale (if you have black or brown skin, this may be easier to see on the palms of your hands or soles of your feet)
you suddenly become very confused, drowsy or dizzy
someone faints and cannot be woken up
a child is limp, floppy or not responding like they normally do (their head may fall to the side, backwards or forwards, or they may find it difficult to lift their head or focus on your face)
You or the person who's unwell may also have a rash that's swollen, raised, itchy, blistered or peeling.

These can be signs of a serious allergic reaction and may need immediate treatment in hospital.

Information:
Do not drive yourself to A&E.

The person you speak to at 999 will give you advice about what to do.




About baclofen
Baclofen is a muscle relaxant.

It's used to relieve muscle spasms, cramping or tightness caused by conditions such as:

cerebral palsy
meningitis
motor neurone disease
multiple sclerosis
conditions affecting your brain, spinal cord and nervous system
Baclofen is available on prescription. It comes as tablets or a liquid that you swallow.

If baclofen tablets or liquid do not work well for you or your child, you may be prescribed a baclofen injection. This will be given by a specialist doctor in hospital. Baclofen can also be given through a pump that is fitted under the skin.

Key facts
Baclofen reduces pain and discomfort caused by muscle spasms.
The tablets and liquid start to work after 1 hour after taking it. However, it might take a few days before you find the right dose to control your symptoms.
Common side effects include feeling sleepy and feeling sick (nausea).
If your doctor decides to stop your treatment, your dose will be reduced gradually over 1 to 2 weeks.
It's best not to drink alcohol while you are taking baclofen until you know how it affects you. There's a risk alcohol may increase drowsy side effects and make you very sleepy.
Who can and cannot take baclofen
Who can take baclofen
Most adults and children aged 1 month and older can take baclofen tablets and liquid.

The injection can be given to adults and children aged 4 years and over.

Who may not be able to take baclofen
Baclofen is not suitable for some people. To make sure it's safe for you, tell your doctor before taking it if you:

have ever had an allergic reaction to baclofen or any other medicine
have a stomach ulcer
have lung, kidney or liver disease
have a mental health condition
have epilepsy
have Parkinson's disease
have diabetes
have ever had a stroke
are being treated for high blood pressure
have difficulty peeing
have a rare blood disorder called porphyria
are pregnant, trying to get pregnant or breastfeeding

About beclometasone inhalers
Beclometasone is a type of medicine known as a steroid (also called a corticosteroid). It's mainly used for asthma, but also sometimes for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

Steroids closely copy the effects of natural hormones produced in your adrenal glands. The adrenal glands are above your kidneys.

Steroid inhalers work as a preventer by calming down your immune system. This reduces the swelling in your lungs that makes it difficult to breathe.

You can take beclometasone using an inhaler (sometimes called a "puffer"), which is usually brown or beige, or sometimes red or pink. This is called a "preventer" inhaler because it helps to prevent you from getting symptoms.

Beclometasone on its own does not work as a reliever (to relieve any symptoms when you get them). It cannot treat an asthma attack when you suddenly get coughing, wheezing and breathlessness.

Some inhalers contain beclometasone mixed with other medicines that help your breathing (bronchodilators).

A beclometasone inhaler containing formoterol (brand names include Fostair, Luforbec and Bibecfo) may be used as both a preventer and a reliever for asthma.

Beclometasone also comes as

nose spray (nasal spray) – for hay fever and cold-like symptoms caused by common allergies (rhinitis)
cream and ointment – for skin conditions such as eczema and psoriasis
tablets – for ulcerative colitis
Key facts
A beclometasone inhaler does not work straight away. You need to use your beclometasone inhaler every day for it to work, even if you do not have any symptoms.
It's important to rinse your mouth or brush your teeth after using a steroid inhaler. This is to prevent infections and a sore mouth.
You may get a blue steroid treatment card if you need high doses of beclometasone to control your symptoms. You may also need to carry a steroid emergency card. Ask your pharmacist or doctor about these.
You'll usually be given another inhaler, called a reliever, to relieve your symptoms when they happen.

Who can and cannot use beclometasone inhalers
Who can use beclometasone inhalers
Most adults can use beclometasone inhalers for asthma or COPD.

Most infants and children can use beclometasone inhalers for asthma. Some brands may only be suitable for older children aged 5 years old and above.

Who may not be able to use beclometasone inhalers
Beclometasone inhalers are not suitable for some people. To make sure they're safe for you, tell your doctor or nurse if you:

have ever had an allergic reaction to beclometasone or any other medicine
cannot have alcohol for any reason (some brands contain a very small amount of alcohol)
have ever had TB (tuberculosis)
are pregnant or trying to get pregnant

How and when to use beclometasone inhalers
Always use your beclometasone inhaler as a doctor, nurse or pharmacist has told you.

Dosage
The usual dose of beclometasone using an inhaler as a preventer for asthma or COPD is 1 or 2 puffs, twice a day.

It's important to use your beclometasone inhaler regularly to manage your symptoms. Use it regularly, even if you do not have any symptoms. After using your inhaler, always put the lid back on to keep it clean.

Beclometasone inhalers come in different strengths. Your doctor, or asthma or respiratory nurse, will tell you which strength is right for you. Always follow their instructions. They may tell you to use your inhaler more often, up to 4 times a day, or to have more than 2 puffs at a time. This depends on how bad your breathing is and which inhaler you're using.

If your beclometasone inhaler also contains formoterol, you may be advised to use it as a preventer and also as a reliever for asthma when you're wheezy or tight chested. In this case, doses can be up to 8 puffs a day in total. Let your doctor or nurse know if you feel you need to use more than 8 puffs in a day.

Changes to your dose
Your dose may go up or down depending on how bad your breathing is. You'll be prescribed the lowest dose that controls your symptoms.

If you've agreed a personal action plan with your doctor or nurse, follow your action plan.

Talk to your doctor or nurse if your breathing seems to be getting worse.

How to use your inhaler
Different types of inhalers
There are different types of beclometasone inhaler, including:

pressurised metered dose inhalers (pMDIs), which give the medicine in a spray form (aerosol) – you can use these with a spacer
breath actuated inhalers (BAIs) – these release a spray of medicine as you inhale
dry powder inhalers (DPIs) – these give the medicine in the form of a dry powder instead of a spray
Speak to your doctor, nurse or pharmacist about which inhaler type is best for you or your child.

It's very important to use your inhaler properly. This is so you get the right amount of beclometasone into your lungs and the most benefit from your medicine.

If you or your child find it difficult to use one type of inhaler, speak to your doctor, nurse or pharmacist about trying a different type.

Before using your inhaler, read the information leaflet that came with it. This leaflet contains instructions and diagrams to show you how to use the inhaler, how to keep it clean, and how long to use it before getting a replacement.

Important
Do not use anyone else's beclometasone inhaler. Your inhaler may be different to a friend's or relative's. Their inhaler might contain a different dose of beclometasone.

Check your inhaler technique
To get the most from your inhaler, it's important to have your technique checked regularly.

If you're not sure how to use your inhaler, or your technique has not been checked for a year, ask your doctor, nurse or a pharmacist to watch you use it.

Important:Risk of choking
Remove the mouthpiece cover completely before using your inhaler. Check the inside and outside of the mouthpiece to make sure it's clean and there's nothing inside it. Shake the inhaler 4 or 5 times to remove any loose objects.

After use, replace the mouthpiece cover straight away. Firmly push it and make sure it clicks into place.

Always store your inhaler with the mouthpiece cover on.

Using your inhaler with a spacer
A spacer is recommended for anyone having high doses and using a pressurised metered dose inhaler (pMDI) that contains a steroid. They're always recommended for children aged 15 years old and under.

As well as making your inhaler easier to use, spacers can also reduce the risk of steroid side effects affecting your mouth and throat.

A spacer is a plastic container with a mouthpiece and a hole for the inhaler. It makes it easier to get the right amount of beclometasone into your lungs. For young children they're available with a face mask.

Your doctor, nurse or a pharmacist can show you how to use a spacer with your inhaler.

Information:
Watch a video
Asthma + Lung UK has some short videos showing you how to use your inhaler to help you manage your symptoms. You can search by type of inhaler and by brand (such as Clenil, Fostair or Qvar).

If you use a pressurised metered dose inhaler for example, you can watch a pMDI video.

How long to use it for
You'll usually use your beclometasone inhaler for a long time. It helps prevent your asthma or COPD getting worse.

It's important to keep using your inhaler even if you feel better.

Do not stop using beclometasone suddenly, even if you feel better, without speaking to your doctor or nurse first.

If you have an inhaler to control your asthma or COPD, your breathing problems may return if you suddenly stop using it. You might feel wheezy or short of breath. Your chest may feel tight and you could start to cough.

Suddenly stopping treatment can make you feel unwell. Symptoms can include feeling drowsy, sick or tired, headaches and loss of appetite.

If you forget to use it
Use your inhaler as soon as you remember, unless it's almost time for your next dose. In this case, skip the missed one and take your next dose at the usual time.

Do not take 2 doses to make up for a forgotten dose.

If you forget doses often, it may help to set an alarm to remind you. You could also ask your pharmacist for advice on other ways to help you remember to take your medicine.


About beclometasone nasal spray
-Brand names: Beconase, Nasobec, Pollenase
Beclometasone nasal (nose) spray is used to treat cold-like symptoms caused by allergic rhinitis. This is swelling (inflammation) of the inside of your nose that can be brought on by allergies like hay fever.

Beclometasone (also called "beclomethasone") is a type of medicine known as a steroid (or corticosteroid). Corticosteroids are a copy of a substance the body makes naturally. They’re not the same as anabolic steroids.

Beclometasone nasal spray is available on prescription for adults and children aged 6 years old and over. You can also buy it from pharmacies and shops for adults aged 18 years old and over.

Beclometasone also comes as:

an inhaler – for asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
cream and ointment – for skin conditions such as eczema and psoriasis
tablets – for ulcerative colitis
Key facts
You need to use beclometasone nasal spray regularly for it to work.
Beclometasone nasal spray takes a few days to work fully. For some people it can take 2 weeks or more to get the maximum benefits.
The most common side effects are an unpleasant taste or smell, and a dry or sore throat.
If your doctor has prescribed high doses of beclometasone to control your symptoms, you may need to carry a steroid emergency card. Ask your pharmacist or doctor.


About beclometasone skin cream
Beclometasone cream and ointment are used to treat itching, swollen and irritated skin. They can help with conditions such as eczema, psoriasis and dermatitis.

Beclometasone (sometimes written as beclomethasone) is a type of medicine known as a steroid (also called a corticosteroid). This is not the same as an anabolic steroid.

When you have an allergic reaction or your skin is irritated, chemicals are released into the skin. Beclometasone cream stops these chemicals getting to your skin and also helps to reduce swelling, redness and itching.

It's stronger than some other steroid skin creams such as hydrocortisone.

Beclometasone skin cream is available on prescription only.

Beclometasone also comes as:

beclometasone inhalers – for asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
beclometasone nasal (nose) spray – for hay fever and cold-like symptoms caused by common allergies (rhinitis)
beclometasone tablets – for ulcerative colitis
Key facts
It's important to follow the instructions when using a steroid skin cream or ointment. This helps to avoid side effects.
Only use a steroid skin treatment if your doctor prescribes it for you. Do not use someone else's medicine.
If you use beclomeasone skin cream for a long time, your doctor may advise you to reduce your dose gradually, to avoid withdrawal reactions.
Creams are better for skin that's moist or weepy. Ointments are thicker and greasier, and are better for dry or flaky skin.
Beclometasone skin cream will not help with conditions such as acne or rosacea.
Only use beclometasone on your face if your doctor says it's OK to.
You may get a blue steroid treatment card if your doctor has prescribed a very high dose of beclomethasone cream to control your symptoms. Show this card to your doctor or dentist before any treatment, so they know you're using it. You may also need to carry a red steroid emergency card (for adults) or an adrenal insufficiency card (for children). Ask your pharmacist or doctor about both of these.


About beclometasone tablets
-Brand name: Clipper
Beclometasone tablets are used to treat ulcerative colitis.

They work by reducing swelling (inflammation) in your gut. They're usually taken alongside other medicines for ulcerative colitis.

Beclometasone is a type of medicine called a steroid (or corticosteroid). Steroids are copies of hormones your body makes naturally. They are not the same as anabolic steroids.

Beclometasone tablets are only available on prescription. They come as slow release tablets. This means that the medicine is released into your body slowly throughout the day.

Beclometasone also comes as:

an inhaler to treat asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
a nasal spray to treat hay fever and allergy symptoms
skin creams to treat conditions such as eczema and psoriasis
Key facts
You'll usually take 1 beclometasone tablet a day, for up to 4 weeks.
It's best to take it in the morning before breakfast. You need to take them regularly for the medicine to work fully. Keep taking them for as long as your doctor tells you, even if you feel better.
You'll get a blue steroid card from your pharmacist or doctor if you're taking beclometasone for more than 3 weeks. Show this card to your doctor or dentist before any treatment, so they know you're taking it. You may also need to carry a red steroid emergency card if you take repeated courses of beclometasone, or if you take other steroids at the same time.
Beclometasone can sometimes give you blurred vision. If this happens, do not drive or ride a bike until your vision is back to normal.
You can drink alcohol while taking beclometasone tablets but if you have ulcerative colitis, alcohol may make your symptoms worse.



Bendroflumethiazide
-Brand names: Aprinox, Neo-Naclex
On this page
About bendroflumethiazide
Key facts
Who can and cannot take bendroflumethiazide
How and when to take bendroflumethiazide
Side effects
How to cope with side effects of bendroflumethiazide
Pregnancy and breastfeeding
Cautions with other medicines
Common questions about bendroflumethiazide
1. About bendroflumethiazide
Bendroflumethiazide is a type of medicine called a diuretic. It's used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension) and the build-up of fluid in your body (oedema).

Diuretics are sometimes called "water tablets" because they make you pee more. This helps get rid of extra fluid in your body.

Bendroflumethiazide is only available on prescription. It usually comes as tablets. It can also come as a liquid you swallow, but this has to be specially ordered.

2. Key facts
You'll usually take bendroflumethiazide once a day in the morning.
If you take bendroflumethiazide later in the day you may have to wake up in the night to go to the toilet.
Common side effects include: needing to pee more often, mild stomach upset, dehydration, and low or high levels of salts (electrolytes) such as potassium or sodium in your blood.
Speak to your doctor or a pharmacist if you have diarrhoea or vomiting from a stomach bug or other illness. You may need to stop taking bendroflumethiazide for a short time.
Bendroflumethiazide is not usually recommended during pregnancy or while breastfeeding.
3. Who can and cannot take bendroflumethiazide
Bendroflumethiazide can be taken by most adults and children, including babies.

Bendroflumethiazide is not suitable for everyone. To make sure it is safe for you, tell your doctor if you:

have ever had an allergic reaction to bendroflumethiazide or any other medicine
have underactive adrenal glands (Addison's disease)
have low levels of sodium, potassium or magnesium in your blood
have high levels of calcium or uric acid in your blood
have liver problems
have kidney problems or difficulty peeing
are being sick (vomiting) or have diarrhoea
have diabetes
have gout
have a rare blood disease called porphyria
have an inflammatory condition called lupus
are pregnant, trying to get pregnant or breastfeeding
4. How and when to take bendroflumethiazide
Dosage
Your dose will depend on what you are taking bendroflumethiazide for, your age and how well your kidneys work.

The usual adult dose for:

high blood pressure is 2.5mg once a day
build-up of fluid is 5mg to 10mg once a day – this may be reduced to a single dose taken 1 to 3 times a week
Occasionally, your doctor might prescribe bendroflumethiazide to be taken twice a day.

Your dose may be lower if you are over 65 or have kidney problems.

For babies and children, your doctor will use your child's weight or age to work out the right dose.

When to take it
It's usual to take bendroflumethiazide once a day, in the morning. If you take it later in the day you may have to wake up in the night to go to the toilet.

If your doctor prescribes it twice a day, take it once in the morning and again around midday.

It's best to take bendroflumethiazide at the same time every day to keep it working properly.

Sometimes your doctor may advise you to take bendroflumethiazide less often. You may only need to take it 2 or 3 times a week, in which case take it on the same days each week.

How to take it
You can take bendroflumethiazide with or without food.

Swallow the tablets whole with a drink of water. Speak to a pharmacist if you or your child finds it difficult to swallow tablets.

If you're taking bendroflumethiazide as a liquid, make sure you shake the bottle well. Use a plastic medicine spoon or oral syringe to help you measure each dose. If you do not have one, ask your pharmacist. Do not measure the liquid with a kitchen teaspoon, as it will not give the right amount.

What if I forget to take it?
If you forget to take bendroflumethiazide, take your forgotten dose as soon as you remember. However, if you normally take your dose in the morning and you do not remember before late afternoon, skip the missed dose and take your next dose at the usual time.

Do not take a double dose to make up for a forgotten dose.

If you often forget doses, it may help to set an alarm to remind you. You could also ask your pharmacist for advice on other ways to help you remember your medicines.

What if I take too much?
Taking more than your prescribed dose of bendroflumethiazide can cause weak or fast heartbeats, seizures or fits (body jerking and shaking uncontrollably), dizziness and confusion – these are signs of dehydration.

The amount of bendroflumethiazide that can lead to an overdose varies from person to person.

Urgent advice:Contact 111 for advice now if:
you or your child have taken too much bendroflumethiazide
Go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.

If you need advice for a child under 5 years, call 111.

Information:
If you need to go to A&E, do not drive. Ask someone to drive you or call 999 and ask for an ambulance.

Bring the bendroflumethaizide packet or leaflet inside it, any remaining medicine, and any other medicines you take.

5. Side effects
Like all medicines, bendroflumethiazide can cause side effects, although not everyone gets them.

You are less likely to get side effects if you are on a low dose, such as 2.5mg daily.

Side effects often get better as your body gets used to the medicine.

Common side effects
Common side effects of bendroflumethiazide include:

feeling thirsty, with a dry mouth
feeling or being sick (nausea or vomiting)
stomach pain
diarrhoea
loss of appetite
constipation
severe joint pain
feeling dizzy and faint
unexpected weight loss, frequent thrush, bladder or skin infections, tiredness, blurred vision and increased thirst
Serious side effects
It happens rarely, but some people have a serious side effect after taking bendroflumethiazide.

Call your doctor straight away if you:

have any bruises or bleeding (including nosebleeds) that you cannot explain – these could be a sign of blood problems
have severe and sudden stomach pain – this could be a sign of pancreas problems
have itching, yellowing of the whites of your eyes, yellowing of your skin (this may be less obvious on brown or black skin), dark pee or pale poo – these could be signs of liver problems
are feeling very thirsty, have dark yellow and strong-smelling pee, are feeling dizzy or lightheaded, or are peeing fewer than 4 times a day – you could be at risk of dehydration
Serious allergic reaction
In rare cases, it's possible to have a serious allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) to bendroflumethiazide.

Immediate action required:Call 999 now if:
your lips, mouth, throat or tongue suddenly become swollen
you're breathing very fast or struggling to breathe (you may become very wheezy or feel like you're choking or gasping for air)
your throat feels tight or you're struggling to swallow
your skin, tongue or lips turn blue, grey or pale (if you have black or brown skin, this may be easier to see on the palms of your hands or soles of your feet)
you suddenly become very confused, drowsy or dizzy
someone faints and cannot be woken up
a child is limp, floppy or not responding like they normally do (their head may fall to the side, backwards or forwards, or they may find it difficult to lift their head or focus on your face)
You or the person who's unwell may also have a rash that's swollen, raised, itchy, blistered or peeling.

These can be signs of a serious allergic reaction and may need immediate treatment in hospital.

Information:
Do not drive yourself to A&E.

The person you speak to at 999 will give you advice about what to do.

These are not all the side effects of bendroflumethiazide. For a full list, see the leaflet inside your medicine packet.

Information:
Reporting side effects
You can report any suspected side effect using the Yellow Card safety scheme.

Visit the Yellow Card website for more information about reporting side effects.

6. How to cope with side effects of bendroflumethiazide
What to do about:

feeling thirsty with a dry mouth – it's important not to get dehydrated, but how much you drink will depend on why you're taking bendroflumethiazide. Check with your doctor how much water you can drink while you're taking this medicine.
feeling or being sick (vomiting) – stick to simple meals and do not eat rich or spicy food. If you're being sick, try frequent small sips of water to avoid dehydration. Speak to your doctor if your symptoms continue for more than a week, if you are vomiting frequently or if you are not able to drink water and may be at risk of dehydration.
stomach pain – try to rest and relax. It can help to eat and drink slowly, and have smaller, more frequent meals. Putting a heat pad or covered hot water bottle on your stomach may also help. If you are in a lot of pain, speak to your pharmacist or doctor.
diarrhoea – drink plenty of water or other fluids. However, check with your doctor how much water you can drink while you're taking bendroflumethiazide. Speak to a pharmacist if you are peeing less than usual or have dark yellow and strong-smelling pee, as you could be at risk of dehydration. Do not take any other medicines to treat diarrhoea without speaking to a pharmacist or doctor.
loss of appetite – eat when you would usually expect to be hungry. If it helps, eat smaller meals but more often than usual. Snack when you're hungry and choose nutritious snacks that are high in calories and protein, such as dried fruit and nuts.
constipation – get more fibre into your diet by eating fresh fruit, vegetables and cereals, and drink plenty of water. However, check with your doctor how much water you can drink while you're taking bendroflumethiazide. Try to exercise more regularly, for example, by going for a daily walk or run. If this does not help, talk to your pharmacist or doctor. You may also want to watch this short video on how to treat constipation.
severe joint pain – if you get severe joint pain and the skin over the joint is hot, swollen and red, this could be a sign of gout. The redness may be less noticeable on brown or black skin. Speak to your doctor if you have these symptoms.
feeling dizzy and faint – these could be signs of low blood pressure. If you feel dizzy or faint, stop what you're doing. Try sitting or lying down until the symptoms pass, and then get up slowly. A drink of water may also help. Do not drive, ride a bike or operate machinery if you are affected. Speak to your doctor if this keeps happening.
unexpected weight loss, frequent thrush, bladder or skin infections, tiredness, blurred vision and increased thirst – speak to your doctor, as these could be signs of high blood sugar or another condition, and your doctor might want to run some tests.
7. Pregnancy and breastfeeding
Bendroflumethiazide and pregnancy
Bendroflumethiazide is not normally used during pregnancy. There are other medicines that are more suitable for treating high blood pressure in pregnancy.

If you're trying to get pregnant or are already pregnant, talk to your doctor about whether taking bendroflumethiazide is right for you. It's likely that you will be switched to a different medicine for high blood pressure.

Bendroflumethiazide and breastfeeding
Bendroflumethiazide is not normally recommended when breastfeeding. It is not expected to cause any harm to your baby, but it can reduce the amount of breast milk you produce.

If you need to take bendroflumethiazide while you're breastfeeding your doctor or midwife will monitor your baby's weight.

Talk to your doctor, as other medicines might be better while you're breastfeeding.

Non-urgent advice:Tell your doctor if you're:
trying to get pregnant
pregnant
breastfeeding
8. Cautions with other medicines
Some medicines can affect the way bendroflumethiazide works.

Tell your doctor if you're taking any of these medicines before starting bendroflumethiazide:

lithium, a medicine used to treat depression and bipolar disorder
allopurinol, a medicine to treat gout
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen, naproxen, or aspirin for pain relief
insulin or any other medicine used to treat diabetes
ciclosporin, a medicine used for preventing transplant rejection or to treat other medical conditions such as psoriasis or rheumatoid arthritis
Also tell your doctor if you're taking medicines that can affect your heart rhythm. There are lots of these, so check with your doctor or pharmacist. Examples include:

medicines used to treat heart problems, such as amiodarone, digoxin, disopyramide, flecainide and sotalol
medicines to treat sickness or nausea (antiemetics), such as domperidone, metoclopramide and prochlorperazine
certain antidepressants, such as amitriptyline, citalopram and venlafaxine
medicines for other mental health problems, such as chlorpromazine, pimozide and trifluoperazine
Tell your doctor if you're taking medicines that affect levels of potassium, sodium, calcium and magnesium and other salts or electrolytes in your blood. There are lots of these, so check with your doctor or pharmacist. Examples include:

other diuretics (medicines that make you pee more)
steroids, such as prednisolone or hydrocortisone
some medicines used for asthma, including inhalers such as formoterol, salbutamol or salmeterol
carbamazepine, a medicine for epilepsy
calcium or vitamin D supplements, including alfacalcidol or calcitriol
Mixing bendroflumethiazide with herbal remedies and supplements
There's very little information about taking herbal remedies and supplements with bendroflumethiazide. They are not tested in the same way as pharmacy and prescription medicines.

About benzoyl peroxide
-Brand name: Acnecide
Benzoyl peroxide is used to treat acne. It works as an antiseptic to reduce the number of germs (bacteria) on the surface of your skin.

It's usually one of the first treatments recommended for mild to moderate acne.

It comes as a gel or face wash containing 5% benzoyl peroxide. This is available to buy from pharmacies or shops with the brand name Acnecide.

Benzoyl peroxide is sometimes mixed with potassium hydroxyquinoline sulfate. This is an antimicrobial ingredient that kills micro-organisms on your skin. It's sold in pharmacies as Quinoderm cream.

Some benzoyl peroxide products are available on prescription only. This is because they contain other medicines such as antibiotics or retinoids (exfoliants). For example, Duac Once Daily contains benzoyl peroxide and clindamycin, an antibiotic. Epiduo gel contains benzoyl peroxide and adapalene, a retinoid.

Many popular skincare brands also make products that contain benzoyl peroxide, but at a lower strength. These are available to buy in pharmacies, supermarkets and shops. Brands include Clean & Clear, Neutrogena and Clearasil.

Key facts
Benzoyl peroxide 5% gel or wash takes around 4 weeks to start working. It can take 2 to 4 months to have full effect.
You'll usually use it 1 or 2 times a day.
The most common side effect is skin irritation. If this happens it's better to use it less often at first, then build up as your skin gets used to it.
Try to avoid strong sunlight while using benzoyl peroxide gel. Use an oil-free sunscreen with SPF30 or above. Ask a pharmacist for advice on which sunscreen is right for your skin type.
Keep benzoyl peroxide away from your hair and clothes, as it can bleach and discolour them.


About benzydamine
-Brand name: Difflam
Benzydamine is an NSAID (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug) that reduces pain and swelling (inflammation). It's used to treat mouth ulcers, sore throats, sore tongue or gums, and teething in babies. It may also be used to treat pain caused by dentures or dental surgery.

Benzydamine comes as a mouthwash, mouth spray or lozenge. This means it will only help with pain in the mouth. It will not work on pain in any other part of the body.

It's available on prescription or to buy from a pharmacy.

Key facts
You'll usually use benzydamine to treat a sore mouth or sore throat for up to 7 days.
Your symptoms will usually start to improve a few minutes after using benzydamine. The effects should last for a few hours.
Benzydamine mouthwash contains more alcohol than benzydamine spray. Do not give the mouthwash to children until they are 13 years old.
You may get a stinging or numb feeling in your mouth after using benzydamine.


Beta blockers
Beta blockers work mainly by slowing down the heart. They do this by blocking the action of hormones like adrenaline.

Beta blockers usually come as tablets.

They are prescription-only medicines, which means they can only be prescribed by a GP or another suitably qualified healthcare professional.

Commonly used beta blockers include:

atenolol (also called Tenormin)
bisoprolol (also called Cardicor or Emcor)
carvedilol
labetalol (also called Trandate)
metoprolol (also called Betaloc or Lopresor)
propranolol (also called Inderal or Angilol)
sotalol
Uses for beta blockers
Beta blockers may be used to treat:

angina – chest pain caused by narrowing of the arteries supplying the heart
heart failure – failure of the heart to pump enough blood around the body
atrial fibrillation – irregular heartbeat
heart attack – an emergency where the blood supply to the heart is suddenly blocked
high blood pressure – when other medicines have been tried, or in addition to other medicines
Less commonly, beta blockers are used to prevent migraine or treat:

an overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism)
anxiety 
tremor
glaucoma – as eyedrops
There are several types of beta blocker, and each one has its own characteristics. The type prescribed for you will depend on your health condition.

Who can take beta blockers
Beta blockers are not suitable for everyone. Tell your doctor if you have:

uncontrolled heart failure
had an allergic reaction to a beta blocker or any other medicine in the past
low blood pressure or certain conditions that affect the rhythm of your heart
metabolic acidosis – when there's too much acid in your blood
lung disease or asthma
Tell your doctor if you're trying to get pregnant, are already pregnant or breastfeeding.

It's important not to stop taking beta blockers without seeking your doctor's advice. In some cases, suddenly stopping the medicine may make your health condition worse.

Cautions with other medicines
There are some medicines that may interfere with the way that beta blockers work, including beta blocker eyedrops.

Tell your doctor if you're taking:

other medicines for high blood pressure. The combination with beta blockers can sometimes lower your blood pressure too much. This may make you feel dizzy or faint
other medicines for an irregular heartbeat such as amiodarone or flecainide
other medicines that can lower your blood pressure. These include some antidepressants, nitrates (for chest pain), baclofen (a muscle relaxant), medicines for an enlarged prostate gland like tamsulosin, or Parkinson's disease medicines such as levodopa
medicines for asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
medicines for diabetes, particularly insulin – beta blockers may make it more difficult to recognise the warning signs of low blood sugar
medicines to treat nose or sinus congestion, or other cold remedies (including those you can buy in the pharmacy)
medicines for allergies, such as ephedrine, noradrenaline or adrenaline
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medicines (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen. These medicines may increase your blood pressure, so it's best to keep them to a minimum
Side effects of beta blockers
Most people taking beta blockers have either no or very mild side effects that become less troublesome with time.

Contact your GP if you're having symptoms that bother you or last more than a few days.

Side effects commonly reported by people taking beta blockers include:

feeling tired, dizzy or lightheaded (these can be signs of a slow heart rate)
cold fingers or toes (beta blockers may affect the blood supply to your hands and feet)
difficulties sleeping or nightmares
difficulty getting an erection or other difficulties with sex
feeling sick
It happens rarely, but some people have serious side effects when taking beta blockers.

Tell a doctor straight away if you have:

shortness of breath and a cough that gets worse when you exercise (like walking up stairs), swollen ankles or legs, or an irregular heartbeat – these can be signs of heart problems
shortness of breath, wheezing and tightening of your chest – these can be signs of lung problems
yellowish skin or the whites of your eyes turn yellow, although this may be less obvious on brown or black skin – these can be signs of liver problems
These are not all the side effects of beta blockers. For a full list, see the leaflet inside your medicine packet.

You can report suspected side effects using the Yellow Card Scheme – find out more on the Yellow Card website.

For more information on the side effects of beta blockers, read about the specific medicine you take in our Medicines A to Z.

Missed or extra doses
Depending on your beta blocker, you can take it up to 4 times a day. Some must be taken once a day, others between 2 and 3 times a day. Check the information included with your medicine.

What if I forget to take it?
If you forget to take a dose of your beta blocker, take it as soon as you remember, unless it is nearly time for your next dose. In this case, just leave out the missed dose and take your next dose as normal.

Never take 2 doses at the same time. Never take an extra dose to make up for a forgotten one.

If you often forget doses, it may help to set an alarm to remind you. You could also ask your pharmacist for advice on other ways to help you remember to take your medicine.

What if I take too much?
If you take more than your prescribed dose, beta blockers can slow down your heart rate and make it difficult to breathe. It can also cause dizziness and trembling.

The amount of beta blocker that can lead to an overdose varies from person to person.



About betahistine
-Brand name: Serc
Betahistine is a medicine used to treat the symptoms of Ménière's disease.

These symptoms include:

feeling dizzy and a spinning sensation (vertigo)
ringing in the ears (tinnitus)
loss of hearing
feeling sick (nausea)
The full name of this medicine is betahistine dihydrochloride.

It's thought to work by reducing build-up of fluid in the inner ear. This helps to reduce how often you get Ménière's disease symptoms and to make them milder.

It comes as tablets and is available on prescription only.

Key facts
You'll usually take betahistine 3 times a day, leaving 6 to 8 hours between doses.
When you start taking betahistine it may take a couple of weeks before you notice any improvements.
Common side effects include headache, feeling sick or indigestion. They're usually mild and do not last long.
It's best to take your tablets with or after food. This way it's less likely to upset your stomach.



About betamethasone for eyes, ears and nose
-Brand names: Betnesol, Vistamethasone
Betamethasone for eyes, ears and nose is used to treat cold-like symptoms caused by allergies. This includes the swelling (inflammation) inside your nose, and redness and irritation in the eyes that can be caused by hay fever and other conditions.

It's also used to treat the inflammation in your outer ear that can be caused by eczema, water or ear plugs.

Betamethasone is a type of medicine called a steroid (or corticosteroid). Corticosteroids are a copy of a substance the body makes naturally. They're not the same as anabolic steroids.

Betamethasone for eyes, ears and nose is available on prescription only, for adults, children and babies aged 1 month old and over.

It comes as an eye ointment or as drops for eyes, ears and nose.

Betamethasone for eyes, ears and nose also comes combined with an antibiotic called neomycin. These drops are used when there's both inflammation and bacterial infection in the eye, nose or ear.

Betamethasone also comes as:

tablets for many conditions, including asthma and rheumatoid arthritis
skin treatments for eczema, contact dermatitis and psoriasis
Key facts
You need to use betamethasone drops and ointment regularly, as advised by your doctor, for them to work
Betamethasone drops and ointment take a few days to work fully.
Common side effects include irritation and blurred vision if you're treating your eyes, and sneezing and changes to smell and taste if you're treating your nose.
Only use a steroid treatment if your doctor prescribes it for you. Do not use someone else's medicine.
You may get a blue steroid treatment card if your doctor has prescribed a very high dose to control your symptoms. Show this card to your doctor or dentist before any treatment, so they know you're using it. You may also need to carry a red steroid emergency card (for adults), or an adrenal insufficiency card (for children). Ask your pharmacist or doctor about both of these.


About betamethasone for skin
-Brand names: Betnovate, Betacap
Betamethasone skin treatments are used to treat itching, swollen and irritated skin. They can help with conditions such as eczema, contact dermatitis and psoriasis.

Betamethasone is a type of medicine known as a steroid (also called a corticosteroid). Steroids are copies of a hormone your body makes naturally. They're not the same as anabolic steroids.

It works by stopping chemicals being released into the skin when you have an allergic reaction or when your skin is irritated. Betamethasone skin treatments help to reduce the swelling, redness and itching.

Betamethasone skin treatments are stronger than some other skin treatments such as hydrocortisone. Betamethasone is usually prescribed when other medicines have not worked.

Betamethasone skin treatments are available on prescription only. They come as:

creams
ointments
lotions
scalp treatments (lotions and foams)
medicated plasters
Sometimes betamethasone is combined with other ingredients to treat skin infections or other skin conditions.

Betamethasone also comes as:

an eye ointment or drops for your eyes, ears or nose to treat allergies and inflammation
tablets and injections to treat allergies, inflammation and autoimmune conditions
Key facts
Only use a steroid skin treatment if your doctor prescribes it for you. Do not use someone else's medicine.
It's important to follow the instructions when using a steroid skin treatment. This helps to avoid side effects.
Only use betamethasone on your face if your doctor says it's OK.
Betamethasone will not help with skin conditions such as impetigo, rosacea and acne.
If you use betamethasone for a long time your doctor might advise you to reduce your dose gradually to avoid withdrawal reactions.
Other betamethasone brand names include Audavate, Bettamousse, Betesil, Fucibet, Xemacort and Diprosone.


About betamethasone tablets
Betamethasone is used to treat a range of conditions including:

allergies
autoimmune conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis
blood disorders
inflammatory skin conditions
inflammatory bowel disease
cancer of the bone marrow (multiple myeloma), acute and lymphatic leukaemia, and cancer of the lymph nodes (lymphoma)
congenital adrenal hyperplasia (an inherited condition causing swollen adrenal glands)
to prevent organ rejection after a transplant
It's also sometimes known as betamethasone sodium phosphate.

Betamethasone is a type of medicine called a steroid (or corticosteroid). Steroids are copies of hormones your body makes naturally. They are not the same as anabolic steroids.

Betamethasone works by reducing swelling (inflammation). It also calms down your immune system, which can help in autoimmune conditions, where your immune system attacks your own body.

Betamethasone is only available on prescription. It comes as soluble tablets that you swallow or dissolve in water. It can also be given by injection but this is usually only done in hospital.

Betamethasone also comes as an eye ointment, eye, ear and nose drops, and different types of medicines used to treat skin conditions. Read about:

betamethasone for eyes, ears and nose
betamethasone for skin
Key facts
You'll usually take betamethasone tablets once a day. It's best to take them in the morning after breakfast.
Common side effects include weight gain, indigestion and sleep problems.
Betamethasone tablets can cause withdrawal side effects if you stop taking them suddenly. Do not stop taking the medicine suddenly if you've been taking it for more than a few weeks.
Taking betamethasone tablets can mean you're more likely to get infections. Tell your doctor if you get an infection, such as coronavirus (COVID-19), or if you come into contact with anyone who has shingles, chickenpox or measles. These infections can make you very ill.
If you take betamethasone tablets for more than 3 weeks, or you're on a high dose, you'll get a blue steroid card from your pharmacist or doctor. You may also need to carry a red steroid emergency card. Show this card to your doctor or dentist before any treatment, so they know you're taking it.
Do not eat real natural liquorice or drink liquorice tea while taking betamethasone. It could increase the risk of side effects.


About bimatoprost
-Brand name: Lumigan
Bimatoprost is a prostamide medicine that treats high pressure inside the eye (ocular hypertension) and glaucoma.

High pressure can happen when too much fluid builds up inside your eye.

If it's not treated, high pressure in the eye can damage your optic nerve and cause vision loss or blindness.

Glaucoma is usually caused by a build-up of pressure in the eye when the fluid cannot drain properly. This pressure damages the optic nerve. Bimatoprost helps to drain the fluid from the eye and reduce the pressure.

Bimatoprost is only available on prescription.

It comes as eye drops in bottles or single-dose droppers. Some bottled eye drops contain a preservative (benzalkonium chloride) to keep them sterile. Other bottled bimatoprost eye drops and the single-dose droppers do not contain a preservative.

Your doctor may also prescribe timolol eye drops (a beta blocker) to use with bimatoprost.

There are some combined eye drops. The brands Eyzeetan and Ganfort contain bimatoprost and timolol.

Key facts
You'll usually use bimatoprost eye drops once a day, usually in the evening.
The eye drops will start to reduce the pressure in your eye after 4 hours and will continue working for over 24 hours.
If it works for you, you'll usually use bimatoprost for the rest of your life.
It's important to use your eye drops regularly and to go for check-ups to make sure your vision is not getting worse.
Common side effects include permanent eye colour change, red and itchy eyelids, and a feeling that something's in your eye.
If you have blurred vision after you put the eye drops in, do not drive, cycle, or use machinery or tools until you can see clearly again.


About bisacodyl
-Brand name: Dulcolax
Bisacodyl is a laxative. This type of medicine can help you empty your bowels if you have difficulty pooing (constipation).

Bisacodyl is also used in hospitals to help you empty your bowels before surgery or some examinations or treatments. Your hospital will explain how to use it.

Bisacodyl comes as a tablet and a suppository, which is a medicine that you push gently into your anus (bottom).

The tablets and suppositories are available on prescription. You can also buy them from pharmacies. Smaller packs (up to 20 standard strength tablets or 10 maximum-strength tablets) can also be bought for adults from pharmacies and shops.

Before trying bisacodyl, it's better to try other ways to help your constipation by:

having more fibre in your diet and drinking more water
exercising
Only use bisacodyl if you have tried other types of laxatives first such as:

bulk-forming laxatives like Fybogel (ispaghula husk)
osmotic laxatives like lactulose and macrogol
Key facts
Bisacodyl is known as a stimulant laxative. It works by helping your bowel move and also softens your poo so you can poo more easily.
Bisacodyl tablets take 6 to 12 hours to work. The suppositories take 10 to 45 minutes to work, so it's best to stay close to a toilet after you've used them.
The most common side effects are feeling sick (nausea), diarrhoea and stomach pain or cramps.
Only give bisacodyl to children and young people if a doctor or pharmacist recommends it.
Do not take bisacodyl tablets or use bisacodyl suppositories every day for more than 5 days.


About bisoprolol
Bisoprolol is a beta blocker medicine used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension) and heart failure.

If you have high blood pressure, taking bisoprolol helps prevent future heart disease, heart attacks and strokes.

Bisoprolol is also used to prevent chest pain caused by angina.

It's also used to treat atrial fibrillation and other conditions that cause an irregular heartbeat.

It works by slowing down your heart rate and making it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body.

Bisoprolol is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets.

Key facts
Bisoprolol starts to work after about 2 hours to reduce high blood pressure, but it can take 2 to 6 weeks to fully take effect.
Your very first dose may make you feel dizzy, so take it at bedtime. After that, if you do not feel dizzy, it's best to take it in the morning.
You'll usually take bisoprolol once a day in the morning.
The main side effects are feeling dizzy or sick, headaches, cold hands or feet, constipation or diarrhoea. These are usually mild and do not last for long.
It's best to stop drinking alcohol when you first start taking bisoprolol, or when your dose increases, until you see how the medicine affects you.
Tell your doctor that you're taking bisoprolol if you're going to have an anaesthetic. You may need to stop taking it 48 hours before surgery.


About brinzolamide
-Brand name: Azopt
Brinzolamide is a medicine that treats high pressure inside the eye (ocular hypertension) and glaucoma.

High pressure can happen when too much fluid builds up inside your eye. If it's not treated, high pressure in the eye can damage your optic nerve and cause vision loss or blindness.

Most cases of glaucoma are caused by a build-up of pressure in the eye when the fluid cannot drain properly. The pressure damages the optic nerve. Brinzolamide helps the eye to produce less fluid.

Brinzolamide is available on prescription only. It comes as eye drops. The bottle of eye drops contains a preservative (benzalkonium chloride) to keep it sterile.

Your doctor may also prescribe timolol or brimonidine eye drops to use with brinzolamide.

There are some combined eye drops. The brand Azarga contains brinzolamide and timolol, and Simbrinza contains brinzolamide and brimonidine.

Key facts
You'll usually use brinzolamide eye drops 2 or 3 times a day.
It may take up to 4 weeks for brinzolamide eye drops to work fully.
If it works for you, you'll usually use brinzolamide for the rest of your life.
It's important to use your eye drops regularly and to go for check-ups, to make sure your vision is not getting worse.
Common side effects include an itchy or painful eye and a feeling that something's in your eye.
If you have blurred vision after you put the eye drops in, do not drive, cycle, or use machinery or tools until you can see clearly again.



Bronchodilators are a type of medication that make breathing easier by relaxing the muscles in the lungs and widening the airways (bronchi).

They're often used to treat long-term conditions where the airways may become narrow and inflamed, such as:

asthma, a common lung condition caused by inflammation of the airways
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), a group of lung conditions, usually caused by smoking, that make breathing difficult
Bronchodilators may be either:

short-acting – used as short-term relief from sudden, unexpected attacks of breathlessness
long-acting – used regularly to help control breathlessness in asthma and COPD, and increase the effectiveness of corticosteroids in asthma
Bronchodilators and corticosteroids
Inhaled corticosteroids are the main treatment to reduce inflammation and prevent flare-ups in asthma.

But some people may also benefit from taking bronchodilators to keep the airways open and enhance the effects of corticosteroids.

Long-acting bronchodilators should never be taken without corticosteroids.

In COPD initial treatment is with short- or long-acting bronchodilators, with corticosteroids added in some severe cases.

Treatment with corticosteroids and bronchodilators may require the use of separate inhalers, but increasingly these medications are provided together in single inhalers.

Types of bronchodilator
The 3 most widely used bronchodilators are:

beta-2 agonists, such as salbutamol, salmeterol, formoterol and vilanterol
anticholinergics, such as ipratropium and tiotropium
theophylline
Beta-2 agonists and anticholinergics are available in both short-acting and long-acting forms, whereas theophylline is only available in a long-acting form.

Beta-2 agonists
Beta-2 agonists are used for both asthma and COPD, although some types are only available for COPD.

They're usually inhaled using a small handheld inhaler, but may also be available as tablets or syrup.

For sudden, severe symptoms, they can also be injected or nebulised.

A nebuliser is a compressor that turns liquid medication into a fine mist, allowing a large dose of the medicine to be inhaled through a mouthpiece or face mask.

Beta-2 agonists work by stimulating receptors called beta-2 receptors in the muscles that line the airways, which causes them to relax and allows the airways to widen (dilate).

They should be used with caution in people with:

an overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism) – a condition that occurs when there's too much thyroid hormone in the body
cardiovascular disease – conditions that affect the heart or blood vessels
an irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia)
high blood pressure (hypertension)
diabetes – a condition that causes a person's blood sugar level to become too high
In rare cases, beta-2 agonists can make some of the symptoms and possible complications of these conditions worse.

Anticholinergics
Anticholinergics (also known as antimuscarinics) are mainly used to treat COPD, but a few can also be used for asthma.

They're usually taken using an inhaler, but may be nebulised to treat sudden and severe symptoms.

Anticholinergics cause the airways to widen by blocking the cholinergic nerves.

These nerves release chemicals that can cause the muscles lining the airways to tighten.

They should be used with caution in people with:

benign prostate enlargement – where the prostate gland becomes enlarged, which can affect how you pee
a bladder outflow obstruction – any condition that affects the flow of urine out of the bladder, such as bladder stones or prostate cancer
glaucoma – a build-up of pressure in the eye
If you have benign prostate enlargement or a bladder outflow obstruction, anticholinergics can cause problems, such as difficulty peeing and not being able to empty your bladder fully.

Glaucoma can get worse if anticholinergic medication unintentionally gets into the eyes.

Theophylline
Theophylline is usually taken in tablet or capsule form, but a different version called aminophylline can be given directly into a vein (intravenously) if your symptoms are severe.

It's unclear exactly how theophylline works, but it seems to reduce any inflammation (swelling) in the airways, in addition to relaxing the muscles lining them.

The effect of theophylline is weaker than other bronchodilators and corticosteroids.

It's also more likely to cause side effects, so is often only used alongside these medicines if they're not effective enough.

Theophylline should be used with caution in people with:

an overactive thyroid
cardiovascular disease
liver problems, such as liver disease
high blood pressure
open sores that develop on the stomach lining (stomach ulcers)
a condition that affects the brain and causes repeated fits (seizures) (epilepsy)
Theophylline may make these conditions worse. In people with liver problems, it can sometimes lead to a dangerous build-up of medication in the body.

Other medicines can also cause an abnormal build-up of theophylline in the body. This should always be checked by your doctor.

Older people may also need additional monitoring while taking theophylline.

Side effects
The side effects of bronchodilators can vary, depending on the specific medication you're taking.

Make sure you read the leaflet that comes with your medication to see what the specific side effects are.

General side effects of bronchodilators include:

trembling, particularly in the hands
headaches
a dry mouth
suddenly noticeable heartbeats (palpitations)
muscle cramps
a cough
nausea and vomiting
diarrhoea
Find out more about the side effects of bronchodilators

Pregnancy and breastfeeding
In most cases bronchodilators should be taken as normal while pregnant or breastfeeding.

But speak to your GP if you regularly use bronchodilators and you're considering having a baby or think you might be pregnant.

Pregnancy may affect your asthma, so it's important to continue taking your medication and have it monitored regularly to make sure the condition is controlled.

Find out more about taking medication during pregnancy

Interactions with other medicines
Bronchodilators may interact with other medicines, which could affect the way they work or increase your risk of side effects.

Some of the medicines that can interact with bronchodilators (particularly theophylline) include:

some diuretics, a type of medication that helps remove fluid from the body
some antidepressants, including monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) and tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
digoxin, a medication used to treat arrhythmias
benzodiazepines, a type of sedative that may sometimes be used as a short-term treatment for anxiety or sleeping problems (insomnia)
lithium, a medication used to treat severe depression and bipolar disorder
quinolones, a type of antibiotic medication
This is not a complete list of all the medications that can interact with bronchodilators, and not all of these interactions apply to each type of bronchodilator.

Always carefully read the patient information leaflet that comes with your medication. 

You may be able to find a specific leaflet on the medicines A to Z on the MHRA website. 

If in doubt, speak to a pharmacist or GP.



About budesonide inhalers
-Brand names: Pulmicort, Budelin
Budesonide inhalers are a steroid medicine that's used for asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

Steroids (also known as corticosteroids) work because they closely copy the effects of natural hormones. Steroid inhalers prevent and reduce the swelling (inflammation) that can happen in your lungs if you have asthma or COPD. This swelling can sometimes make it difficult to breathe.

You can take budesonide using an inhaler (sometimes called a "puffer"), which is usually brown or beige. This is called a preventer inhaler because it helps to prevent you from getting symptoms.

Budesonide on its own does not work as a reliever (a medicine that relieves symptoms when you get them). It cannot treat an asthma attack when you suddenly get coughing, wheezing and breathlessness.

Some inhalers contain budesonide mixed with other medicines that help your breathing (bronchodilators).

A budesonide inhaler containing formoterol can be used as both a preventer and a reliever for asthma and COPD. Brand names include Symbicort Turbohaler, DuoResp Spiromax, Fobumix Easyhaler and WockAIR.

Budesonide also comes as:

a nasal spray – for allergic rhinitis, hay fever and nasal polyps
tablets, including tablets that dissolve on your tongue, capsules and granules – for inflammatory conditions such as Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, autoimmune hepatitis and eosinophilic oesophagitis
rectal foam and enemas – for ulcerative colitis
a nebuliser liquid
If you have severe asthma or COPD, you may need to use a nebuliser. A nebuliser helps you breathe in your medicine as a mist, using a mask or a mouthpiece. You can use a nebuliser in hospital, or you may be given one to manage your condition at home. Budesonide nebuliser liquid comes in individual doses called nebules or respules.

Key facts
A budesonide inhaler does not work straight away. You need to use it every day for it to work, even if you do not have any symptoms.
It's important to rinse your mouth or brush your teeth after using a steroid inhaler. This is to prevent infections and a sore mouth.
You may get a blue steroid treatment card if you need a high dose of budesonide inhaler to control your symptoms. You may also need to carry a red steroid emergency card. Ask your pharmacist or doctor about these.
You'll usually be given another inhaler called a reliever to help your symptoms when they happen. Or you may be given an inhaler containing budesonide and formoterol that can be used as both a preventer and a reliever. You'll usually be given a combined inhaler if you have COPD.


About budesonide nasal spray
-Brand name: Benacort
Budesonide nasal (nose) spray is used to treat cold-like symptoms caused by allergic rhinitis. This is swelling (inflammation) of the inside of your nose that can be brought on by allergies like hay fever.

It's also used to shrink nasal polyps (painless, soft growths inside the nose) to relieve a blocked nose.

Budesonide is a type of medicine called a steroid (or corticosteroid). Steroids are a copy of a substance your body makes naturally. They're not the same as anabolic steroids.

Budesonide nasal spray is available on prescription for adults and children aged 6 years old and over. You can also buy it from pharmacies and shops for adults aged 18 years old and over.

Budesonide also comes as:

an inhaler – for asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
tablets, including tablets that dissolve on your tongue, capsules and granules – for inflammatory conditions such as Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, autoimmune hepatitis and eosinophilic oesophagitis
rectal foam and enemas – for ulcerative colitis
Key facts
You need to use budesonide nasal spray regularly for it to work.
For allergic rhinitis, budesonide nasal spray takes a few days to work. For some people, it can take several weeks to work fully.
For nasal polyps, it can take 1 to 2 months for symptoms to get better.
The most common side effects are sneezing, nosebleeds and a dry or sore nose.



About budesonide rectal foam and enemas
-Brand names: Budenofalk, Entocort
Budesonide rectal foam and enemas are used to treat ulcerative colitis. These medicines are inserted into your bottom (rectum).

Ulcerative colitis is a long-term condition where you get swelling (inflammation), and sometimes ulcers, in the lining of your bowel. The most common symptoms are stomach (abdominal) pain and diarrhoea with blood in it.

Budesonide is a type of medicine known as a steroid or corticosteroid.

Budesonide rectal foam and enemas do not cure ulcerative colitis. However, they can help symptoms by reducing the inflammation in your bowel.

This medicine is only available on prescription.

Budesonide also comes as:

budesonide inhalers – for asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
budesonide nasal spray – for allergic rhinitis, hay fever and nasal polyps
budesonide tablets, capsules and granules – for inflammatory conditions such as Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis, and autoimmune hepatitis
Key facts
You'll usually use budesonide rectal foam or an enema once a day. Do not use it for longer than 8 weeks, unless your doctor says so.
Budesonide rectal foam and enemas help with symptoms like stomach pain and diarrhoea with blood in it. For most people, symptoms start to improve after 1 or 2 weeks.
Using budesonide rectal foam or enemas can mean you're more likely to get infections. Tell your doctor if you get an infection, such as coronavirus (COVID-19), or if you come into contact with anyone who has shingles, chickenpox or measles while you're using budesonide.
You may get a blue steroid treatment card if you need high doses of budesonide to control your symptoms. You may also need to carry a red steroid emergency card. Ask your pharmacist or doctor about both of these.
Do not eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice while you're using budesonide rectal foam or enemas. It can affect the way the medicine works.


About budesonide tablets, capsules and granules
-Brand names: Budenofalk, Entocort CR, Cortiment, Jorveza
Budesonide is used to reduce swelling (inflammation), which helps to control symptoms of some conditions.

Budesonide is a type of medicine called a steroid (or corticosteroid). Steroids are copies of hormones your body makes naturally. They are not the same as anabolic steroids.

It comes as tablets, capsules, granules and tablets that dissolve on your tongue. These different types of budesonide medicine have different brand names and are used for different conditions.

Most brands of budesonide, including Cortiment slow-release tablets and Entocort capsules, are used for inflammatory bowel diseases, such as Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis and microscopic colitis.

Capsules called by the brand name Budenofalk can also be used for autoimmune hepatitis, a condition where the immune system attacks the liver.

Tablets called by the brand name Jorveza dissolve on your tongue and are used for inflammation in the food pipe (eosinophilic oesophagitis).

Budesonide tablets, capsules and granules are only available on prescription.

Budesonide also comes as an inhaler, a nasal spray, a rectal foam and an enema, for treating other conditions. Read about:

budesonide inhalers for asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
budesonide nasal spray for cold-like symptoms caused by allergic rhinitis, hay fever and nasal polyps
budesonide rectal foam and enemas for ulcerative colitis affecting the lower gut and anus
Key facts
You'll usually take budesonide 1 to 3 times a day, depending on your dose, type of medicine, and brand.
Common side effects can include stomach pain or indigestion, muscle pain, headaches, skin reactions and mouth thrush (oral thrush).
Taking budesonide tablets, capsules or granules can mean you're more likely to get infections. Tell your doctor if you get an infection, such as COVID-19, or if you come into contact with anyone who has shingles, chickenpox or measles. These infections can make you very ill.
If you take budesonide for more than 3 weeks, or you're on a high dose, you'll get a blue steroid card. You may also need to carry a (red) steroid emergency card. Ask your pharmacist or doctor about both of these.
Keep taking budesonide until your doctor tells you to stop or you have finished your course, even if you feel better.
Do not eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice while you're taking budesonide, as it can increase the chance of side effects.

About bumetanide
Bumetanide is a type of medicine called a diuretic. It's used to treat heart failure and the build up of fluid in your body (oedema).

Diuretics are sometimes called "water tablets" because they make you pee more. This helps get rid of extra fluid in your body.

Bumetanide is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets and as a liquid that you swallow.

Bumetanide also comes mixed with another diuretic called amiloride to treat oedema.

Key facts
You'll usually take bumetanide once a day, in the morning or afternoon – or twice a day, in the morning and afternoon.
Most people need to pee about 30 minutes after taking bumetanide, and again within a few hours.
Avoid foods that have a lot of salt in them (processed foods or ready-meals), and the salt substitute, Lo Salt. It can affect how your medicine works.
Do not take bumetanide after 4pm or you may have to wake up in the night to go to the toilet.
You can take bumetanide with or without food.



About buprenorphine for pain
-Brand names: Butec, Buvidal, Espranor, Suboxone, Subutex
Buprenorphine is a strong opioid medicine. It's mainly used to treat moderate to severe pain, for example during or after an operation or a serious injury, or pain from cancer.

It's also used for other types of long-term pain when weaker painkillers have stopped working.

It works by blocking pain signals between the brain and the rest of the body. It also reduces the anxiety and stress caused by pain.

It can also be used to treat drug dependency, but this is usually prescribed by a specialist.

Buprenorphine is only available on prescription. It comes as:

patches to put on your skin
tablets that dissolve in your mouth
injections – usually only given in hospital
implants that are inserted under the skin of your upper arm – only used for drug dependency
Key facts
The most common side effects of buprenorphine are constipation, feeling sick and feeling sleepy.
It's possible to become addicted to buprenorphine, but your doctor will explain how to reduce the risks.
Your treatment plan may include details of how and when to stop taking buprenorphine.
Do not drive a car or ride a bike if buprenorphine makes you sleepy, gives you blurred vision or makes you feel dizzy, clumsy or unable to concentrate or make decisions.
It's best not to drink alcohol when you first start buprenorphine treatment. You're more likely to get side effects such as feeling sleepy or drowsy.
Tell a doctor or nurse about your buprenorphine if you're having any other treatments or tests. Also, remind your pharmacist about your buprenorphine when you collect prescriptions or buy other medicines.


Buscopan (hyoscine butylbromide)
On this page
About Buscopan
Key facts
Who can and cannot take Buscopan
How and when to take Buscopan
Side effects
How to cope with side effects of Buscopan
Pregnancy and breastfeeding
Cautions with other medicines
Common questions about Buscopan
1. About Buscopan
Buscopan relieves painful stomach cramps, including those linked with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).

It can also help bladder cramps and period pain.

Buscopan contains the active ingredient hyoscine butylbromide.

It's not the same as hyoscine hydrobromide, which is a different medicine taken to prevent motion sickness.

Buscopan comes as tablets and is available on prescription. Buscopan also comes as 2 different products that you can buy from a pharmacy or shop:

Buscopan Cramps
Buscopan IBS Relief
It can also be given by injection, but this is usually only done in hospital.

2. Key facts
Buscopan relieves the pain of stomach cramps by helping your gut to relax.
The medicine works very quickly. Painful cramps should ease within 15 minutes.
It's unusual to have any side effects, but some people get a dry mouth, constipation and blurred vision.
Buscopan comes on prescription and as 2 different products (Buscopan IBS Relief and Buscopan Cramps) that you can buy from a pharmacy or shop.
If you're self-treating with Buscopan, do not take it for longer than 2 weeks without checking with a doctor.
3. Who can and cannot take Buscopan
Most adults and children from 6 years of age can take Buscopan.

Only take Buscopan IBS Relief tablets if your doctor has said that you have irritable bowel syndrome.

Important:Giving Buscopan to children
Do not give Buscopan Cramps tablets to children under the age of 6 years.

Do not give Buscopan IBS Relief tablets to children under the age of 12 years.

Who may not be able to take Buscopan
Buscopan is not suitable for some people.

Check with your doctor or pharmacist before taking Buscopan if you:

ever had an allergic reaction to Buscopan or any other medicine
a rare type of glaucoma called acute angle closure glaucoma (Buscopan can increase the pressure in the eye and make your glaucoma worse)
a very enlarged bowel
myasthenia gravis (a condition where the muscles become weak and tire easily)
a condition where your bowel is blocked and does not work properly, such as paralytic ileus
are 40 years or over
are pregnant, trying to get pregnant or breastfeeding
have recently passed blood in your poo
are feeling or being sick (nausea or vomiting)
have lost your appetite or lost weight
are feeling tired and looking paler than usual
have unusual vaginal bleeding or vaginal discharge
think you may have food poisoning (especially if you have recently travelled abroad)
have a very fast heart rate or any other heart problems
have difficulty or pain when peeing (for example, men with prostate problems)
have an overactive thyroid
have a high temperature
have digestive problems such as heartburn and acid reflux, severe constipation or ulcerative colitis
4. How and when to take Buscopan
Always follow the advice of your doctor or pharmacist or the instructions that come with Buscopan.

Dosage and strength
Each Buscopan tablet contains 10mg of hyoscine butylbromide. Buscopan tablets are all the same strength whether you get them on prescription or whether you buy them as Buscopan Cramps or Buscopan IBS Relief.

The usual dose of Buscopan for stomach cramps (or cramping pain) in adults and children aged 12 years and over is 2 tablets, taken 4 times a day.

For children aged 6 to 11 years, the usual dose is 1 tablet, taken 3 times a day.

The usual dose of Buscopan for symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) diagnosed by a doctor in adults and children aged 12 years and over is 1 tablet, taken 3 times a day. You can increase this to 2 tablets, taken 4 times a day if needed.

When to take Buscopan
Take Buscopan tablets when you have stomach cramps or period pain.

Buscopan does not usually upset your stomach, so you can take it with or without food.

Only take Buscopan IBS Relief if a doctor has confirmed that you have IBS.

What if I forget to take it?
If you forget to take a dose, take it as soon as you remember. If you do not remember until it's nearly time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next one at the usual time.

Never take 2 doses at the same time. Never take an extra dose to make up for a forgotten one.

If you often forget doses, it may help to set an alarm to remind you. You could also ask your pharmacist for advice on other ways to remember to take your medicines.

What if I take too much?
If you take an extra dose of Buscopan, it's unlikely to harm you.

Speak to your pharmacist or doctor if you're worried, or if you have taken more than 1 extra dose.

5. Side effects
Like all medicines, Buscopan can cause side effects in some people, but most people have no side effects or only minor ones.

Common side effects
These side effects happen in more than 1 in 100 people.

Talk to your doctor or pharmacist if these side effects bother you or do not go away:

dry mouth
constipation
blurred vision
fast heart rate
Serious side effects
It happens rarely, but some people may have a serious side effect when taking Buscopan.

Stop taking Buscopan and call a doctor straight away if you:

get a painful red eye with loss of vision (this could be caused by increased pressure in your eye)
find it hard to pee
Serious allergic reaction
In rare cases, it's possible to have a serious allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) to Buscopan.

Immediate action required:Call 999 now if:
your lips, mouth, throat or tongue suddenly become swollen
you're breathing very fast or struggling to breathe (you may become very wheezy or feel like you're choking or gasping for air)
your throat feels tight or you're struggling to swallow
your skin, tongue or lips turn blue, grey or pale (if you have black or brown skin, this may be easier to see on the palms of your hands or soles of your feet)
you suddenly become very confused, drowsy or dizzy
someone faints and cannot be woken up
a child is limp, floppy or not responding like they normally do (their head may fall to the side, backwards or forwards, or they may find it difficult to lift their head or focus on your face)
You or the person who's unwell may also have a rash that's swollen, raised, itchy, blistered or peeling.

These can be signs of a serious allergic reaction and may need immediate treatment in hospital.

Information:
Do not drive yourself to A&E.

The person you speak to at 999 will give you advice about what to do.

These are not all the side effects of Buscopan. For a full list, see the leaflet inside your medicine packet.

Information:
Reporting side effects
You can report any suspected side effect using the Yellow Card safety scheme.

Visit the Yellow Card website for more information about reporting side effects.

6. How to cope with side effects of Buscopan
What to do about:

dry mouth – chew sugar-free gum or suck sugar-free sweets
constipation – get more fibre into your diet, such as fresh fruit, vegetables and cereals, and drink plenty of water. Try to exercise more regularly, for example, by going for a daily walk or run. If this does not help, talk to your pharmacist or doctor.
blurred vision – do not drive or ride a bike until you can see clearly again. Do not take your next dose of Buscopan if your vision is still blurry. Speak to your doctor or pharmacist if your vision has not returned to normal a day after taking your last dose.
fast heart rate – if this happens regularly after taking Buscopan, try to take your medicine at a time when you can sit or lie down when the symptoms are worst. It may also help to cut down on alcohol, smoking, caffeine and big meals, as these can make the problem worse. If you're still having symptoms after a week, speak to your doctor. You may need to change to a different type of medicine.
7. Pregnancy and breastfeeding
Buscopan and pregnancy
Buscopan is not thought to be harmful in pregnancy. However, because there is only very limited information on its use in pregnancy, it's not generally recommended.

If you think you need to take Buscopan in pregnancy, talk to your doctor of pharmacist who will help you decide, or may recommend other medicines for you.

Buscopan and breastfeeding
Buscopan is not usually recommended while breastfeeding. However, some people may still need it. It's better to only take occasional doses or only take it for a short time.

It's not known how much Buscopan gets into breast milk, but it's likely to be a small amount. Buscopan may also reduce the amount of milk you produce.

If you're breastfeeding or planning to breastfeed, talk to your doctor or pharmacist, as other medicines might be better while you're breastfeeding. If they say it's OK for you to keep taking Buscopan, monitor your baby for possible side effects, such as sleepiness, constipation, peeing less than usual and colic.

If your baby is not feeding as well as usual, or you have any other concerns about your baby while you're breastfeeding, talk to your doctor, pharmacist, health visitor or midwife.

Non-urgent advice:Tell your doctor if you're:
trying to get pregnant
pregnant
breastfeeding
For more information about how Buscopan can affect you and your baby during pregnancy, read this leaflet on the Best Use of Medicines in Pregnancy (BUMPS) website.

8. Cautions with other medicines
Some medicines and Buscopan can affect each other and increase the chances of you having side effects.

Do not take Buscopan at the same time as some motion sickness medicines, such as domperidone and metoclopramide.

This is because they can cancel each other out and stop each other from working. Metoclopramide and domperidone increase the movement of the gut, whereas Buscopan reduces it.

Some medicines increase the risk of side effects if you take them at the same time as Buscopan, including:

codeine
medicines for allergies such as antihistamines
some medicines for depression, such as amitriptyline
some medicines for mental health problems like schizophrenia or bipolar disorder, such as clozapine or chlorpromazine
amantadine (taken for Parkinson's disease)
quinidine or disopyramide (heart medicines)
some inhaled asthma medicines, including salbutamol, ipratropium and tiotropium
Do not take Buscopan together with other irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) remedies, as they work in the same way. You're unlikely to get extra relief for your symptoms, and it may cause more side effects. Take only one IBS remedy, unless your doctor tells you to take more than one.

Mixing Buscopan with herbal remedies and supplements
There's not enough information to say that complementary medicines and herbal remedies or supplements are safe to take with Buscopan.

They're not tested in the same way as pharmacy and prescription medicines. They're generally not tested for the effect they have on other medicines.








About calcipotriol
-Brand name: Dovonex
Calcipotriol is used to treat plaque psoriasis, a skin problem where your body produces too many skin cells, causing patches of dry, itchy, scaly skin (plaques).

Calcipotriol is a type of vitamin D. Vitamin D controls how the cells in your skin grow. Calcipotriol reduces the amount of cells your skin makes and helps to clear the psoriasis plaques.

This medicine is only available on prescription. It comes as an ointment and a scalp solution.

Sometimes calcipotriol is mixed with a steroid called betamethasone to reduce swelling (inflammation) caused by psoriasis. This combined medicine comes as an ointment, gel or a foam. It's sometimes called by the brand names Daloney, Dovobet or Enstilar.

There is also a type of vitamin D called colecalciferol, which sounds similar to calcipotriol. Colecalciferol is used to treat vitamin D deficiency.

Key facts
You'll use calcipotriol once or twice a day.
Never put calcipotriol on your face because it may cause irritation. If you get it on your face, wash it off straight away. Only use it on psoriasis plaques. Do not put it on healthy skin.
Always wash your hands thoroughly before and after using calcipotriol. If you use it to treat your hands, only wash the skin that is not affected.
The most common side effects of calcipotriol are skin irritation and a burning or stinging feeling. They usually only last a short time.
You may find that your skin is more sensitive to sunlight. Your doctor might advise you to avoid spending too much time in the sun or using sunbeds, and to use sunscreen and wear clothes that protect you from the sun.


About candesartan
Candesartan is a medicine widely used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension) and heart failure.

It helps to prevent future strokes, heart attacks and kidney problems. It also improves your survival if you're taking it for heart failure.

There's some evidence that candesartan might help prevent migraines. However, candesartan is not officially approved for migraine. Your doctor would probably advise you to try other medicines first.

This medicine is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets.

Key facts
Candesartan lowers your blood pressure and makes it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body.
It's often used as a second-choice treatment if you had to stop taking your first medicine because it gave you a dry, irritating cough.
The main side effects of candesartan are feeling dizzy or faint and headaches, but they're usually mild and do not last long.
If you get severe diarrhoea or vomiting from a stomach bug or illness, tell your doctor. You may need to stop taking candesartan for a while until you feel better.
Drinking alcohol can increase the blood pressure-lowering effect of candesartan, which can make you feel dizzy or lightheaded. It's best to stop drinking alcohol until you see how the medicine affects you.


Medical cannabis (and cannabis oils)
"Medical cannabis" is a broad term for any sort of cannabis-based medicine used to relieve symptoms.

Many cannabis-based products are available to buy online, but their quality and content is not known. They may be illegal in the UK and potentially dangerous.

Some products that might claim to be medical cannabis, such as CBD oil or hemp oil, are available to buy legally as food supplements from health stores. But there's no guarantee these are of good quality or provide any health benefits.

Specific cannabis-based products are available on prescription as medicinal cannabis. These are only likely to benefit a very small number of patients.

Can I get a prescription for medical cannabis?
Very few people in England are likely to get an NHS prescription for medical cannabis.

Currently, it is only likely to be prescribed for the following conditions:

children and adults with rare, severe forms of epilepsy
adults with vomiting or nausea caused by chemotherapy
people with muscle stiffness and spasms caused by multiple sclerosis (MS)
It would only be considered when other treatments were not suitable or had not helped.

Epidyolex for children and adults with epilepsy
Epidyolex is a highly purified liquid containing CBD (cannabidiol).

CBD is a chemical substance found in cannabis that has medical benefits.

It will not get you high, because it does not contain THC (tetrahydrocannabinol), the chemical in cannabis that makes you high.

Epidyolex can be prescribed by a specialist for patients with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and Dravet syndrome (both rare forms of epilepsy).

Nabilone for chemotherapy patients
Many people having chemotherapy will have periods where they feel sick or vomit.

Nabilone can be prescribed to adults by a specialist to help relieve these symptoms, but only when other treatments have not helped or are not suitable.

Nabilone is a medicine, taken as a capsule, that has been developed to act in a similar way to THC (the chemical in cannabis that makes you high). You may have heard it described as a "manmade form of cannabis".

Nabiximols (Sativex) for multiple sclerosis (MS)
Nabiximols (Sativex) is a cannabis-based medicine that is sprayed into the mouth.

It is licensed in the UK for adults with MS-related muscle spasticity that has not got better with other treatments.

Read more from the MS Society on Sativex for treating muscle stiffness and spasms

Long-term pain
There is some evidence medical cannabis can help certain types of pain, though this evidence is not yet strong enough to recommend it for pain relief.

In some cases, however, it may be prescribed for pain as part of a clinical trial.

What about products available to buy?
Some cannabis-based products are available to buy over the internet without a prescription.

It's likely most of these products – even those called CBD oils – will be illegal to possess or supply. There's a good chance they will contain THC, and may not be safe to use.

Health stores sell certain types of CBD. However, there's no guarantee these products will be of good quality.

They tend to only contain very small amounts of CBD, so it's not clear what effect they would have.

Is medical cannabis safe?
The risks of using cannabis products containing THC (the chemical that gets you high) are not currently clear. That's why clinical trials are needed before they can be used. Products that only contain CBD, such as Epidyolex, do not carry these unknown risks linked with THC.

But in reality, most products will contain a certain amount of THC.

The potential risks of THC cannabis products are:

psychosis – there is evidence that regular cannabis use in some people can increase the risk of developing a psychotic illness such as schizophrenia
dependency on the medicine – although scientists believe this risk is probably small when its use is controlled and monitored by a specialist doctor
Generally, the more THC the product contains, the greater these risks are.

Cannabis bought illegally off the street, where the quality, ingredients and strength are not known, is the most dangerous form to use.

Read about the risks of regularly smoking cannabis at Talk to Frank

What are the side effects?
Depending on the type of medical cannabis you take, it's possible to develop side effects such as:

decreased appetite
diarrhoea
feeling sick
weakness
a behavioural or mood change
dizziness
feeling very tired
feeling high
hallucinations
suicidal thoughts
If you experience any side effects from medical cannabis, report these to your medical team. You can also report them through the Yellow Card Scheme.

CBD and THC can affect how other medicines work. Always discuss possible interactions with a specialist.

CBD can also affect how your liver works, so doctors would need to monitor you regularly.

How do I get a prescription?
Cannabis-based medicine can only be prescribed on the NHS by a specialist hospital doctor, or under a specialist's supervision.

And it is only likely to be prescribed for a small number of patients.

A hospital specialist might consider prescribing medical cannabis:

for epilepsy – if you (or your child) have one of the rare forms of epilepsy that might be helped by medical cannabis
for MS – if you have spasticity from MS and other treatments for this are not helping
for chemotherapy – if you are vomiting or feeling sick from chemotherapy and other anti-sickness treatments are not helping
The specialist will discuss with you all the other treatment options first, before considering a cannabis-based product.

A prescription for medical cannabis would only be given when it was believed to be in your best interests, and when other treatments had not worked or were not suitable.

It's expected this would only apply to a very small number of people in England.

If the above does not apply to you, do not ask a GP for a referral for medical cannabis.

How do I prove I have a prescription?
Keep your medicine in its original packaging, as the dispensing label contains important information about the medicine and the person it’s prescribed for.

The dispensing label is the label the pharmacist puts on the medicine packet when they give you your prescription medicine.

You should also keep a copy of your prescription, and a letter (if you have one) from the doctor who prescribed the medicine. The letter should include your personal details (including name and address), as well as the prescribing doctor’s name and contact details.

You may need to show ID that matches the details on the dispensing label and the prescription, or the doctor’s letter, if you have one.

Acceptable forms of ID include:

valid passport
photo driving licence
proof of age card, such as a PASS card from the national Proof of Age Standards Scheme
Information:
If you need any legal advice about possessing a cannabis-based medicine, speak to a legal adviser or solicitor.

Read about how to find legal advice on GOV.UK.

Will the laws on cannabis be relaxed?
The government has no intention of legalising the use of cannabis for recreational (non-medical) use.

Possessing cannabis is illegal, whatever you're using it for. That includes medical use cannabis products, unless these have been prescribed for you.

About carbamazepine
Carbamazepine is a medicine used to treat epilepsy.

It can also be taken for nerve pain caused by diabetes (peripheral neuropathy) or if you have a painful condition of the face called trigeminal neuralgia.

Carbamazepine is occasionally used to treat bipolar disorder when other medicines have not worked.

This medicine is only available on prescription. It comes as standard and slow-release tablets, a liquid that you drink and suppositories (medicine that you push gently into your anus).

Important
The brand Carbagen has been discontinued. If you are currently taking Carbagen, contact your doctor for a different brand to be prescribed.

Updated: 28 September 2020

Key facts
It usually takes a couple of weeks for carbamazepine to work.
Common side effects of carbamazepine include feeling sleepy, feeling dizzy, headaches and feeling or being sick. These are usually mild and go away by themselves.
When taking carbamazepine for epilepsy, it's best to stick to the same brand. If your usual brand is not available, talk to your doctor.
Drinking alcohol while taking carbamazepine may make you feel sleepy or tired. It's best to stop drinking alcohol for the first few days, until you see how the medicine affects you.
Do not drink grapefruit juice if you're taking carbamazepine. It increases the amount of carbamazepine in your body and increases the risk of side effects.

Carbimazole
On this page
About carbimazole
Key facts
Who can and cannot take carbimazole
How and when to take carbimazole
Side effects of carbimazole
How to cope with side effects of carbimazole
Pregnancy and breastfeeding
Cautions with other medicines
Common questions about carbimazole
1. About carbimazole
Carbimazole is a medicine used to treat an overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism). This is when your thyroid gland makes too many thyroid hormones.

Your thyroid controls things like your heart rate and body temperature. When it makes too many hormones, you can have symptoms such as weight loss, mood swings and feeling irritable.

Carbimazole helps to ease these symptoms by reducing the amount of hormones your thyroid produces.

This medicine is only available on prescription.

It usually comes as tablets. If you are unable to swallow tablets, your doctor may be able to prescribe carbimazole as a liquid.

Sometimes your doctor will prescribe carbimazole together with a beta blocker. This can help with your symptoms if you have a fast heartbeat, or feel jittery or anxious.

2. Key facts
You’ll have blood tests before and during treatment with carbimazole.
When you first start taking this medicine, it can take up to 3 weeks to see an improvement in your symptoms.
Side effects usually only happen in the first 8 weeks and tend not to last long.
One rare side effect can be a sudden drop in your white blood cell count. This makes it harder to fight infections.
If you are pregnant, your dose of carbimazole needs to be monitored carefully.
3. Who can and cannot take carbimazole
Most adults, children and babies can take carbimazole.

However, carbimazole is not suitable for everyone. To make sure it's safe for you, tell your doctor if you:

have ever had an allergic reaction to carbimazole or any other medicines
have had severe pancreas problems (acute pancreatitis) after taking carbimazole
are due to have radioactive iodine treatment for your overactive thyroid
have liver problems or a problem with your blood
have a swollen thyroid (goitre)
cannot have regular blood tests
are pregnant or trying for a baby, or there's a chance you could get pregnant
4. How and when to take carbimazole
Always follow the advice of a doctor, and the instructions that come with your medicine.

Swallow the tablets whole, with a drink of water. You can take carbimazole with or without food.

When you first start taking carbimazole, you will take it 2 or 3 times a day. Try to space the doses evenly throughout the day. If you take it 3 times a day, you could take it first thing in the morning, in the middle of the afternoon and at bedtime.

Dosage and strength
Carbimazole comes as 5mg, 10mg, 15mg and 20mg tablets. You may need to take more than 1 tablet to make up your dose.

Doses vary depending on your symptoms, your thyroid hormone levels and whether you have any other health conditions. Your doctor will tell you how many tablets to take.

The usual starting dose for adults is between 20mg and 60mg a day, split into 2 or 3 smaller doses.

Children usually start on 15mg a day, taken once a day, or split into 2 or 3 smaller doses.

Having blood tests during treatment
You need to have blood tests before you start taking carbimazole and during treatment. These tests are important to check the levels of thyroid hormones in your body.

Depending on the results, your doctor may need to increase or reduce your dose to get these hormones to the right levels. When your levels are stable, you can usually go onto a lower dose, taken once a day.

When you first start treatment, you'll have blood tests every 6 weeks or so. Once your hormone levels are stable, you'll have a blood test every 3 months, for as long as you continue to take carbimazole.

However, you may need blood tests more often if you:

are pregnant
have symptoms or side effects that could mean your dose is not quite right
What if I forget to take it?
If you forget to take a dose, take it as soon as you remember. If it is time for your next dose, take both doses together.

If you forget doses often, it may help to set an alarm to remind you. You can also ask your pharmacist for advice on other ways to help you remember to take your medicine.

What if I take too much?
Urgent advice:Contact 111 for advice now if:
you take more than your usual dose of carbimazole
Call 111 or go to 111 online.

Have the medicine packet, the tablets and the information leaflet with you.

Information:
If you need to go to A&E, do not drive. Ask someone to drive you or call 999 and ask for an ambulance.

Bring the carbimazole packet or leaflet inside it, any remaining medicine, and any other medicines you take.

5. Side effects of carbimazole
Like all medicines, carbimazole can cause side effects, although not everyone gets them. If you do have side effects, these usually happen in the first 8 weeks of taking carbimazole.

Common side effects
Common side effects usually improve as your body gets used to carbimazole.

Talk to a doctor or pharmacist if these side effects bother you or do not go away:

feeling sick (nausea)
being sick (vomiting) or diarrhoea
feeling dizzy
headache
painful joints
itchy skin or rash
thinning hair
Serious side effects
Serious side effects are uncommon.

Stop taking carbimazole and tell a doctor straight away if:

you have a high temperature, sore throat, mouth sores, toothache or flu-like symptoms – these can be signs of a low white blood cell count
you have sudden severe stomach (abdominal) pain – this can be a sign of an inflamed pancreas (acute pancreatitis)
the whites of your eyes or your skin turns yellow (this may be less obvious on brown or black skin), dark pee – this can be a sign of liver problems
you have swollen glands – this can be a sign of infection
you feel faint, tired and sweaty – these can be signs of low blood sugar
Serious allergic reaction
In rare cases, it's possible to have a serious allergic reaction to carbimazole (anaphylaxis).

Immediate action required:Call 999 now if:
your lips, mouth, throat or tongue suddenly become swollen
you're breathing very fast or struggling to breathe (you may become very wheezy or feel like you're choking or gasping for air)
your throat feels tight or you're struggling to swallow
your skin, tongue or lips turn blue, grey or pale (if you have black or brown skin, this may be easier to see on the palms of your hands or soles of your feet)
you suddenly become very confused, drowsy or dizzy
someone faints and cannot be woken up
a child is limp, floppy or not responding like they normally do (their head may fall to the side, backwards or forwards, or they may find it difficult to lift their head or focus on your face)
You or the person who's unwell may also have a rash that's swollen, raised, itchy, blistered or peeling.

These can be signs of a serious allergic reaction and may need immediate treatment in hospital.

Information:
Do not drive yourself to A&E.

The person you speak to at 999 will give you advice about what to do.

These are not all the side effects of carbimazole. For a full list, see the leaflet inside your medicine packet.

Information:
Reporting side effects
You can report any suspected side effect using the Yellow Card safety scheme.

Visit the Yellow Card website for more information about reporting side effects.

6. How to cope with side effects of carbimazole
What to do about:

feeling sick – stick to simple meals and try not eat rich or spicy food. It may help to take your carbimazole with food or just after eating.
being sick (vomiting) or diarrhoea – drink lots of fluids, such as water or squash, to avoid dehydration. Take small, frequent sips if you are being sick. Signs of dehydration include peeing less than usual or having dark, strong-smelling pee. Contact a doctor if this lasts for more than a few days. Tell your doctor if you get severe diarrhoea or vomiting from a stomach bug or illness that lasts for more than 2 days..
feeling dizzy – lie down until the dizziness passes, then get up slowly. Move slowly and carefully. Avoid coffee, cigarettes, alcohol and recreational drugs. Do not drive, cycle or operate machinery until you feel ok again. If the dizziness does not get better, or this keeps happening, speak to a doctor.
headaches – make sure you rest and drink plenty of fluids. Do not drink too much alcohol. Ask your pharmacist to recommend a painkiller. Headaches should usually go away. Talk to your doctor if they last longer than a week or are severe.
painful joints – cooling treatments can help with joint pain. Try putting an ice pack wrapped in a cloth on the joint for about 15 minutes, and repeat several times a day. Avoid keeping the joint still and take gentle exercise to stop it becoming stiff. Ask a pharmacist to recommend a painkiller. Speak to your doctor if the pain is no better after a week.
itchy skin or rash – use unperfumed moisturizer or skin lotion, wear loose cotton clothing, keep your nails clean, short and smooth, and pat or tap the skin instead of scratching it. Ask your pharmacist to recommend an antihistamine.
thinning hair – no one knows if taking carbimazole causes this or if it's the changes in your thyroid hormone levels. Hair usually grows back but this may take a little while because the natural cycle of hair growth takes several months.

About carbocisteine
-Brand name: Mucodyne
Carbocisteine is a type of medicine called a mucolytic.

A mucolytic helps you cough up phlegm (also called mucus or sputum). It works by making your phlegm less thick and sticky.

This can help if you have a condition that affects your lungs, including:

chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
cystic fibrosis
Carbocisteine is only available on prescription.

It comes as capsules and as a syrup or a liquid that you drink.

Key facts
Carbocisteine will start working straight away but it may take a while for your symptoms to improve.
You usually take carbocisteine 3 or 4 times a day.
You can take it with or without food.
Side effects can include diarrhoea or feeling or being sick.



About carmellose sodium eye drops
-Brand names: Celluvisc, Carmize, Optive
Carmellose sodium is a lubricant used to treat dry eyes. It comes as eye drops that work like artificial tears. They soothe dry eyes and make them feel moist again.

Carmellose sodium eye drops can help dry eyes caused by conditions such as:

blepharitis
rheumatoid arthritis
Sjögren's syndrome
lupus
They can also help with dry eyes caused by looking at computer screens or wearing contact lenses.

Carmellose sodium eye drops are available to buy from pharmacies and shops. Some brands are available on prescription.

Some types of carmellose sodium eye drops have preservative in them. This is to keep the drops clean (sterile) and safe to use for longer. There are also preservative-free drops available, either as multi-dose bottles or single dose (or unit dose) droppers.

Key facts
You can use carmellose sodium eye drops as often as you need to.
Carmellose sodium eye drops should start to work straight away, but it may take several weeks before you feel the full effects.
If you wear contact lenses or need to use carmellose sodium eye drops more than 4 times a day, a brand that does not contain a preservative may be best for you.
Carmellose sodium eye drops are generally safe, with no long-term side effects.
Do not share eye drops with other people. This can increase the risk of spreading infections to others.


About carvedilol
Carvedilol is used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension) and help prevent:

heart disease
heart attacks
strokes
It can also be taken with other medicines to treat heart failure and to prevent chest pain caused by angina.

Carvedilol is a beta blocker. It works by slowing down your heart rate and making it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body.

It's only available on prescription. It comes as tablets.

Key facts
You'll usually take carvedilol once or twice a day.
It usually starts to work after about 1 hour. But it will take days or weeks for it to work fully.
Common side effects of carvedilol include feeling tired or dizzy, feeling sick or being sick, and diarrhoea.
Do not stop taking carvedilol suddenly. This can make your condition worse, especially if you have heart disease.
If carvedilol makes you feel tired or dizzy, do not drive a car or ride a bike. It's also best not to drink alcohol if it makes you feel dizzy.


About cefalexin
-Brand name: Keflex
Cefalexin is an antibiotic. It belongs to a group of antibiotics called cephalosporins.

It's used to treat bacterial infections, such as pneumonia and other chest infections, skin infections and urinary tract infections (UTIs).

Cefalexin is only available on prescription. It comes as capsules, tablets or as a liquid that you swallow.

Key facts
You'll usually start to feel better in a few days, depending on the type of infection you have.
The most common side effects of cefalexin are feeling sick (nausea) and diarrhoea.
Do not take zinc supplements while you're taking cefalexin. Zinc can affect how cefalexin works in your body.
You can drink alcohol while taking cefalexin.
It's important to keep taking cefalexin until you've completed the course, even if you feel better.

About cetirizine
-Brand names: Allacan, Benadryl Allergy, Piriteze Allergy, Zirtek Allergy
Cetirizine is an antihistamine medicine that helps the symptoms of allergies.

It's used to treat:

hay fever
conjunctivitis (red, itchy eye)
eczema
hives (urticaria) – an itchy, raised rash that’s usually caused by an allergic reaction
reactions to insect bites and stings
some food allergies
Cetirizine is known as a non-drowsy antihistamine. It's much less likely to make you feel sleepy than some other antihistamines.

Cetirizine is available on prescription, and to buy from pharmacies and shops.

It comes as tablets, capsules and as a liquid that you swallow.

Key facts
You'll usually take cetirizine once a day. Children aged under 12 years old take a lower dose twice a day.
Cetirizine is classed as a non-drowsy antihistamine, but some people still find it makes them feel quite sleepy. Do not drive or ride a bike if it makes you sleepy.
Common side effects include headaches, dry mouth, feeling sick, feeling dizzy and diarrhoea.
Some brands of cetirizine come as capsules. These may contain soya oil. Do not take cetirizine capsules if you’re allergic to peanuts or soya.
Some Benadryl products do not contain cetirizine, but a different antihistamine such as acrivastine.


About chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol is an antibiotic medicine.

It's mainly used to treat eye infections (such as conjunctivitis) and sometimes ear infections.

Chloramphenicol comes as eyedrops or eye ointment. These are available on prescription or to buy from pharmacies.

It also comes as eardrops. These are on prescription only.

The medicine is also given into a vein (intravenously) or as capsules. This treatment is for serious infections and is nearly always given in hospital.

Key facts
Chloramphenicol is safe for most adults and children.
For most eye infections, you'll usually start to see an improvement within 2 days of using chloramphenicol.
For ear infections, you should begin to feel better after a few days.
Your eyes may sting for a short time after using the eyedrops or ointment. The eardrops may cause some mild discomfort for a few minutes after using them.
If you usually wear contact lenses, do not wear them while you're using chloramphenicol eyedrops or ointment


About chlorhexidine
-Brand names: Corsodyl, Covonia, Dermol, Germolene, Savlon
Chlorhexidine is an antiseptic and disinfectant. It helps reduce the number of germs (bacteria) in your mouth or on your skin.

It can help with:

mouth infections, mouth ulcers and gum disease
sore throats
denture care
skin infections
Chlorhexidine is usually combined with other ingredients. Some sore throat treatments have a local anaesthetic to help numb pain.

Mouth and throat treatments come as mouthwashes, lozenges, gels and sprays.

Skin treatments come as creams, ointments and lotions.

Many chlorhexidine treatments are available to buy in pharmacies, and some are available in shops and supermarkets.

For nose infections, there's a nasal cream that contains chlorhexidine and neomycin, an antibiotic. This medicine is available on prescription only and is known by the brand name Naseptin.

Chlorhexidine is also used in hospitals and clinics to clean skin or surgical equipment before surgery. It can be used in some bladder procedures, including cleaning catheters.

Key facts
You'll usually use chlorhexidine only for short-term treatment.
You're unlikely to have any side effects with the skin creams and lotions.
Common side effects with the throat spray, lozenges and dental treatments include a dry mouth and stained teeth.
When using the lozenges, spray, mouthwash or dental gel, wait at least 30 minutes before having something to eat or drink. This gives the medicine a chance to work properly.
Do not use bleach on clothes, bedding or other fabrics that have been in contact with chlorhexidine. It will leave yellowish-brown stains.


Chlorphenamine (Piriton)
-Other brand names: Allerief, Hayleve, Pollenase
On this page
About chlorphenamine
Key facts
Who can and cannot take chlorphenamine
How and when to take chlorphenamine
Side effects
How to cope with side effects of chlorphenamine
Pregnancy and breastfeeding
Cautions with other medicines
Common questions about chlorphenamine
1. About chlorphenamine
Chlorphenamine is an antihistamine medicine that relieves the symptoms of allergies.

It's known as a drowsy (sedating) antihistamine. This means that it is likely to make you feel more sleepy than some other antihistamines.

It's used for:

hay fever
red, itchy eyes (conjunctivitis)
eczema
hives (urticaria) caused by food allergies and chickenpox
insect bites and stings
Chlorphenamine is available on prescription, and to buy from pharmacies.

It comes as tablets or as a liquid that you swallow.

Chlorphenamine is sometimes mixed with other medicines like ephedrine or pseudoephedrine to treat coughs and colds.

When chlorphenamine is mixed with other medicines, it can be called Galpseud Plus Linctus and Haymine.

2. Key facts
Chlorphenamine usually takes 30 minutes to 1 hour to work.
Common side effects include feeling sick (nausea), sleepy or dizzy. You may also have difficulty concentrating, a dry mouth, headaches or blurred vision.
Wait a minimum of 4 hours between taking doses.
Do not drink alcohol while you're taking chlorphenamine. Alcohol may make you feel sick or more sleepy.
If you've bought chlorphenamine from a pharmacy without a prescription, do not take it for longer than 2 weeks. If you are still having symptoms, speak to your doctor.
3. Who can and cannot take chlorphenamine
Chlorphenamine can be taken by most adults.

Children and chlorphenamine
You can buy cough, cold and other medicines that contain chlorphenamine from pharmacies. This type of chlorphenamine should not be given to children under the age of 6.

Children under 6 should only be given chlorphenamine that has been prescribed by their doctor.

Who may not be able to take chlorphenamine
Chlorphenamine is not suitable for some people. To make sure it's safe for you, tell your doctor or pharmacist if you:

have ever had an allergy to chlorphenamine or any other medicine
have an eye problem called primary angle closure glaucoma
have problems peeing or emptying your bladder
have epilepsy or another health problem that puts you at risk of fits or seizures
are due to have an allergy test – taking chlorphenamine may affect the results, so you might need to stop taking it a few days before the test. Ask a pharmacist or your doctor for advice
are unable to have any alcohol – some liquid chlorphenamine products contain a very small amount of alcohol. Check the ingredients and the packaging carefully
are a frail, older adult – you may experience more side effects, such as confusion
4. How and when to take chlorphenamine
If you or your child has been prescribed chlorphenamine, follow your doctor's instructions about how and when to take it.

If you have bought chlorphenamine or any medicine containing chlorphenamine from a pharmacy, follow the instructions that come with the packet, or ask your pharmacist for advice.

If you or your child's symptoms do not get better within a few days, talk to a doctor.

Dosage and strength
Chlorphenamine comes as 4mg tablets and the liquid comes as 2mg in 5ml.

If you're taking liquid chlorphenamine, follow the instructions that come with the medicine for how much to take.

The usual dose is:

adults and children aged 12 years and older – 1 tablet every 4 to 6 hours. Do not take more than 6 tablets in 24 hours
children aged under 12 years – doses are lower for children and babies, and they may take it less often than an adult. Your doctor will use your child's age to work out the right dose. Children should only take chlorphenamine that has been prescribed by a doctor. Do not give children under 6 years cough or cold medicines that contain chlorphenamine
older adults who are frail – 1 tablet every 6 to 8 hours. Do not take more than 3 tablets in 24 hours. Speak to your doctor or pharmacist before taking it as you're more likely to get side effects
When used for coughs and colds, chlorphenamine is mixed with other medicines in a liquid that you swallow. Follow the instructions on the bottle or packaging for how much to take.

How to take chlorphenamine
You can take chlorphenamine with or without food.

Swallow chlorphenamine tablets with a drink of water, milk or juice. The 4mg tablets can be broken in half for children and people taking lower doses.

Chlorphenamine liquid may be easier for children to take than tablets. The medicine will come with a plastic syringe or spoon to help you measure out the right dose.

If you do not have a syringe or spoon, ask your pharmacist for one. Do not use a kitchen teaspoon because it will not measure the right amount.

When to take it
Only take chlorphenamine when you need to.

For allergies, you may only need to take chlorphenamine on the days you feel you need to. For example, coming into contact with something like animal hair may have triggered your symptoms.

For hay fever, you may need to take it regularly to prevent symptoms during spring and summer.

If you forget to take it
Take your forgotten dose as soon as you remember, unless it's nearly time for your next dose.

Do not take 2 doses at the same time, or take an extra dose to make up for a forgotten one.

If you forget doses often, it may help to set an alarm to remind you. You could also ask your pharmacist for advice on other ways to help you remember to take your medicine.

If you take too much
If you have taken more than the recommended dose of chlorphenamine, you may:

feel very sleepy
feel nervous or restless
feel or be sick (nausea or vomiting)
get blurred vision
get a very fast, uneven or pounding heartbeat (palpitations)
In serious cases, you can have a fit or seizure, or become unconscious, and may need emergency treatment in hospital.

Urgent advice:Contact 111 for advice now if:
you take more than the recommended dose of chlorphenamine
Go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111

Call 111 if you're asking about a child under the age of 5 years.

Information:
If you need to go to A&E, do not drive. Ask someone to drive you or call 999 and ask for an ambulance.

Bring the chlorphenamine packet or leaflet inside it, any remaining medicine, and any other medicines you take.

5. Side effects
Like all medicines, chlorphenamine can cause side effects, although not everyone gets them.

Common side effects
Common side effects of chlorphenamine happen in more than 1 in 100 people.

Talk to your doctor or pharmacist if these side effects bother you or do not go away:

feeling sleepy during the daytime
feeling sick (nausea)
feeling dizzy or difficulty concentrating
dry mouth
headaches
blurred vision
Children and people aged over 65 have more chance of getting some side effects, such as feeling restless, excited or confused.

Serious side effects
Tell your doctor straight away if:

the whites of your eyes turn yellow, or your skin turns yellow although this may be less obvious on brown or black skin – these can be signs of liver problems
you are bruising or bleeding more than normal
Serious allergic reaction
In rare cases, it's possible to have a serious allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) to chlorphenamine.

Immediate action required:Call 999 now if:
your lips, mouth, throat or tongue suddenly become swollen
you're breathing very fast or struggling to breathe (you may become very wheezy or feel like you're choking or gasping for air)
your throat feels tight or you're struggling to swallow
your skin, tongue or lips turn blue, grey or pale (if you have black or brown skin, this may be easier to see on the palms of your hands or soles of your feet)
you suddenly become very confused, drowsy or dizzy
someone faints and cannot be woken up
a child is limp, floppy or not responding like they normally do (their head may fall to the side, backwards or forwards, or they may find it difficult to lift their head or focus on your face)
You or the person who's unwell may also have a rash that's swollen, raised, itchy, blistered or peeling.

These can be signs of a serious allergic reaction and may need immediate treatment in hospital.

Information:
Do not drive yourself to A&E.

The person you speak to at 999 will give you advice about what to do.

These are not all the side effects of chlorphenamine. For a full list, see the leaflet inside your medicine packet.

Information:
Reporting side effects
You can report any suspected side effect using the Yellow Card safety scheme.

Visit the Yellow Card website for more information about reporting side effects.

6. How to cope with side effects of chlorphenamine
What to do about:

feeling sleepy during the daytime – drowsiness usually wears off 4 to 6 hours after a dose. Do not drive, ride a bike or use tools or machinery if you're feeling this way.
feeling sick (nausea) – it may help if you do not eat rich or spicy food while you're taking chlorphenamine.
feeling dizzy or difficulty concentrating – stop what you're doing and sit or lie down until you feel better. If the feeling does not go away or is troubling you, do not take any more medicine and speak to a pharmacist or your doctor.
dry mouth – chew sugar-free gum or suck sugar-free sweets.
headaches – make sure you rest and drink plenty of fluids. Ask your pharmacist to recommend a painkiller. Talk to your doctor if the headaches last longer than a week or are severe.
blurred vision – do not drive, ride a bike or use tools or machinery while this is happening. This should only be a mild problem in most people who are affected but if it bothers you, speak to your pharmacist or doctor as they may need to change your treatment.
7. Pregnancy and breastfeeding
Chlorphenamine and pregnancy
Chlorphenamine can be used in pregnancy. There is no good evidence that it is harmful to your baby, but it can have side effects such as feeling drowsy.

Your doctor or pharmacist may recommend a non-drowsy antihistamine (loratadine) before chlorphenamine.

Chlorphenamine and breastfeeding
If your doctor or health visitor says your baby is healthy, you can use chlorphenamine during breastfeeding. This is a drowsy antihistamine, so it is better to take occasional doses or only for a short time.

It is not known how much chlorphenamine gets into breast milk, but it has been used for many years without causing babies to have side effects. However, chlorphenamine can cause drowsy symptoms, so may also make your baby sleepy too.

If you're breastfeeding or planning to breastfeed, talk to your doctor or pharmacist as other medicines might be better while breastfeeding.

If your baby is not feeding as well as usual, seems unusually sleepy, or seems irritable, or if you have any other concerns about your baby, talk to your doctor, pharmacist, health visitor or midwife.

Non-urgent advice:Tell your doctor if you're:
trying to get pregnant
pregnant
breastfeeding
Find out more about how chlorphenamine can affect you and your baby during pregnancy on the Best Use of Medicines in Pregnancy (BUMPS) website.

8. Cautions with other medicines
Some medicines and chlorphenamine affect each other and increase the chances of you having side effects.

Check with your pharmacist or doctor if you're taking:

a type of antidepressant called a monoamine oxidase inhibitor, such as phenelzine
phenytoin (an anti-epilepsy medicine)
any medicine that makes you drowsy, gives you a dry mouth, or makes it difficult for you to pee – taking chlorphenamine might make these side effects worse
Mixing chlorphenamine with herbal remedies and supplements
There might be a problem taking some herbal remedies and supplements alongside chlorphenamine, especially ones that cause side effects such as sleepiness, a dry mouth or making it difficult to pee.

Important:Medicine safety
Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you're taking any other medicines, including herbal medicines, vitamins or supplements.



About cinnarizine
-Brand name: Stugeron
Cinnarizine is an antihistamine that stops you feeling or being sick (nausea or vomiting).

It works by blocking the effects of histamine in your brain to reduce the symptoms of travel sickness (motion sickness).

It also helps to improve blood flow in the inner ear. This reduces the dizziness and sickness you can get from vertigo, tinnitus and Ménière's disease.

Cinnarizine is known as a drowsy (sedating) antihistamine, so it's more likely to make you feel sleepy than other antihistamines.

It also comes mixed with dimenhydrinate (another antihistamine) to treat vertigo.

Cinnarizine comes as tablets. It is available on prescription, or to buy in pharmacies.

Key facts
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking cinnarizine. Alcohol increases the chance of side effects.
To prevent travel sickness, take cinnarizine 2 hours before your journey. You can take another dose 8 hours later if you need to.
Common side effects include feeling sleepy, putting on weight or indigestion.
Cinnarizine works gradually. It can take up to 4 hours to reach its full effect.
Take cinnarizine after a meal to stop it upsetting your stomach.


About ciprofloxacin
-Brand names: Ciproxin, Ciloxan, Cetraxal
Ciprofloxacin is an antibiotic. It belongs to a group of antibiotics called fluoroquinolones. It works by killing the bacteria that causes an infection.

Ciprofloxacin is a broad-spectrum antibiotic which means that it's used to treat a number of bacterial infections, such as:

uncomplicated urinary tract infections (UTIs) where other antibiotics are not suitable and complicated UTIs
chest infections (including pneumonia)
skin and bone infections
sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
conjunctivitis
eye infections
ear infections
infections that other antibiotics have been unable to treat
It is also used to help prevent people getting meningitis if they have been in close contact with someone with the infection.

Ciprofloxacin is only available on prescription.

It comes as tablets, a liquid that you drink, ear drops and eye drops. It's also given by injection, but this is usually done in hospital.

Ciprofloxacin ear drops also come mixed with other medicines, such as fluocinolone, known as Cetraxal Plus, or dexamethasone.

Ciprofloxacin tablets and liquid are only used when no other antibiotics are suitable, because there's a risk of serious and long-term side effects.

Key facts
The most common side effects of ciprofloxacin tablets and liquid are feeling sick (nausea) and diarrhoea.
Avoid taking the tablets or liquid together with dairy products like milk, cheese and yoghurt or products with added calcium. They stop ciprofloxacin entering the body from the stomach.
Ciprofloxacin may make you feel tired or less alert, or cause temporary stinging or burning in your eyes. Do not drive, cycle or operate heavy machinery until you feel better.
Very rarely ciprofloxacin can cause serious mental health side effects. If you feel that ciprofloxacin is affecting your mood or behaviour, contact your doctor immediately.
Ciprofloxacin works straight away and, depending on your type of infection, you should start to see your symptoms improve within about 2 to 3 days. Talk to your doctor if it takes longer for your symptoms to get better.


About citalopram
Citalopram is a type of antidepressant known as a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI).

It's often used to treat low mood (depression) and also sometimes for panic attacks. It helps many people recover from depression, and has fewer side effects than older antidepressants.

Citalopram is available on prescription. It comes as tablets and liquid drops that you put in water and drink.

Key facts
It usually takes 4 to 6 weeks for citalopram to work, although you should start to feel better after 1 to 2 weeks.
Side effects such as tiredness, feeling nervous, dry mouth and sweating are common. They're usually mild and go away after a couple of weeks.
If you and your doctor decide to stop taking citalopram, your doctor may recommend reducing your dose gradually to help prevent withdrawal symptoms.
Do not take the herbal supplement St John's wort while you're taking citalopram. It will increase your risk of side effects.



About clarithromycin
Clarithromycin is an antibiotic. It's used to treat chest infections such as pneumonia, skin problems such as cellulitis, and ear infections. It's also used to treat Helicobacter pylori, a bacteria that can cause stomach ulcers.

Clarithromycin is sometimes used by people who have an allergy to penicillin and antibiotics similar to penicillin, like amoxicillin.

Clarithromycin is only available on prescription.

It comes as tablets, granules, or a liquid that you drink. It can also be given by injection, but this is usually only done in hospital.

Key facts
You'll usually take clarithromycin twice a day: once in the morning and once in the evening.
Some people take slow-release clarithromycin tablets. This means that the medicine is gradually released into your body over 24 hours. These are taken once a day.
For most infections, you should feel better within a few days.
The most common side effects of clarithromycin are feeling sick (nausea) or being sick (vomiting), stomach cramps, and diarrhoea.
You can drink alcohol while taking clarithromycin.


About clobetasol
-Brand names: Dermovate, ClobaDerm, Etrivex
Clobetasol is a steroid medicine that's used on the skin to treat swelling, itching and irritation. Although it is a steroid, it's not the same as anabolic steroids.

Clobetasol is a very strong steroid. It works by reducing the swelling (inflammation), itching and pain caused by an allergic reaction or irritation.

It can help with skin problems such as:

eczema, including contact dermatitis
psoriasis
lichen planus
lupus (discoid lupus erythematosus)
Clobetasol is available on prescription only.

It comes as a cream, ointment, scalp treatment and shampoo.

There is also a cream and ointment called clobetasone which sounds similar to clobetasol. Clobetasone is much milder and you can buy it from pharmacies or shops.

Clobetasol is also available as a medicine combined with an antibiotic (neomycin sulfate) and an antifungal (nystatin). This is only available on prescription.

Key facts
Do not put clobetasol on your face unless your doctor says it's OK. It can make some skin problems on the face worse.
Clobetasol starts to work after a few days. You can use it for up to 4 weeks.
If you have applied clobetasol to your skin, wait at least 30 minutes before using another product, like a moisturiser.
If your doctor has prescribed high doses of clobetasol to control your symptoms you may need to carry a steroid emergency card. Ask your pharmacist or doctor.
Dried skin cream on your clothes or bedding makes them more likely to catch fire (flammable). Avoid naked flames.
If you use clobetasol for a long time your doctor might advise you to reduce your dose gradually to avoid withdrawal reactions.


About clobetasone
-Brand names: Eumovate, Clobavate
Clobetasone (also known as clobetasone butyrate) is a steroid medicine used on the skin to treat swelling, itching and irritation.

It can help with skin problems such as:

eczema, including contact dermatitis
psoriasis
insect bites and stings
nappy rash
It may also be used to help keep your condition under control between courses of a stronger steroid. This is known as maintenance therapy.

Steroids (or corticosteroids) are copies of hormones your body makes naturally. They are not the same as anabolic steroids.

Clobetasone comes as cream or ointment. It's available on prescription or you can buy it from a pharmacy or shop.

There is also a cream called clobetasol, which sounds similar to clobetasone. This is a much stronger steroid cream and is only available on prescription.

Sometimes clobetasone is combined with the antibiotic oxytetracycline and the antifungal nystatin. This is called by the brand name Trimovate.

Key facts
Your skin should start to get better after you've used clobetasone for a few days.
Do not put clobetasone on your face unless your doctor has prescribed it. It can make some skin problems of the face worse.
If you buy clobetasone from a pharmacy or supermarket, do not use it for longer than a week without talking to a pharmacist or doctor.
Steroid creams like clobetasone are not a cure for your skin conditions like eczema or psoriasis, so your symptoms may return when you stop using it. You can reduce the effects of this by stopping use of the cream gradually.
Side effects are rare. Some people get a burning or stinging feeling for a few minutes after using clobetasone but this usually stops after a few days.
If you use clobetasone for a long time your doctor might advise you to reduce your dose gradually to avoid withdrawal reactions.


About clonidine
-Brand name: Catapres
Clonidine is a type of medicine called a vasodilator.

Clonidine has many uses. It's mainly used to:

prevent migraine or other similar types of headache
treat hot flushes or sweats that may happen during the menopause
It's also sometimes used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension).

It helps to relax and widen blood vessels in the heart so blood can pass through them more easily.

Clonidine is only available on prescription.

It comes as tablets or as a liquid that you swallow. It's also available as an injection, but this is only given in hospital for emergency treatment of high blood pressure.

Key facts
Clonidine may take 2 to 4 weeks to work fully and for you to start to feel better.
You'll take it 1 to 3 times a day for as long as you need it. It's safe to take clonidine for a long time.
Common side effects of clonidine include feeling sleepy, low blood pressure when you stand up, and constipation.
If clonidine makes you feel sleepy or dizzy, do not drive, cycle or use machinery or tools until you feel better.
Stopping clonidine suddenly can cause a dangerous increase in your blood pressure and withdrawal side effects. Do not stop taking it without talking to a doctor.



About clonazepam
Clonazepam belongs to a group of medicines called benzodiazepines.

It's used to control seizures or fits due to epilepsy, involuntary muscle spasms, panic disorder and sometimes restless legs syndrome.

It works by increasing the levels of a calming chemical in your brain called gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). This can relieve anxiety, stop seizures and fits or relax tense muscles.

Clonazepam is available on prescription only. It comes as tablets and as a liquid that you swallow.

Key facts
If you're taking clonazepam for seizures or muscle spasms, your dose will be increased gradually and it might take up to a week to work fully. For panic disorder and restless legs syndrome, clonazepam should take around 1 hour to start working.
The most common side effect of clonazepam is feeling sleepy (drowsy) during the daytime. Do not drive or ride a bike if this happens to you.
It's possible to get addicted to clonazepam, but it's not likely to be addictive if you take it for a short time (2 to 4 weeks).
If you take clonazepam for more than 2 to 4 weeks, your dose will need to be reduced gradually before you stop taking it.
Do not drink alcohol while taking clonazepam. There's a risk you can sleep very deeply and you may have trouble waking up.



About clopidogrel
-Brand names: Grepid, Plavix
Clopidogrel is an antiplatelet medicine. It prevents platelets (a type of blood cell) from sticking together and forming a dangerous blood clot.

Taking clopidogrel helps prevent blood clots if you have an increased risk of having them.

Your risk is higher if you have or have had:

a heart attack
unstable angina
a stroke or "mini-stroke" (transient ischaemic attack or TIA)
peripheral arterial disease
atrial fibrillation
an operation on your heart or blood vessels, such as a coronary stent insertion
Clopidogrel is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets.

Key facts
You'll usually take clopidogrel once a day.
Your doctor may prescribe clopidogrel with or instead of low-dose aspirin.
The main side effect of clopidogrel is bleeding more easily than normal. You may have signs such as nosebleeds, heavier periods, bleeding gums or bruising.
You can drink alcohol with clopidogrel. But do not drink too much while taking this medicine. It can irritate your stomach.
Do not drink grapefruit juice while taking clopidogrel, as it stops the medicine from working as well.
You may need to stop taking clopidogrel for a short time before having surgery or dental treatment, but check with your doctor or dentist first.


About clotrimazole cream, spray and solution
-Brand name: Canesten
Clotrimazole is an antifungal medicine. It's used to treat skin infections caused by a fungus (yeast). It works by killing the fungus that is causing the infection.

Clotrimazole treats different types of fungal infections, including:

athlete's foot
ringworm
fungal nail infection
infected nappy rash
rash in folds of skin (intertrigo)
Clotrimazole is available as a cream, spray and a solution that you put on your skin. The treatment you use will depend on where the infection is on your body.

You can buy clotrimazole from a pharmacy or shop.

Clotrimazole is also available as external and internal cream and pessaries, to treat vaginal thrush.

Key facts
It usually takes around 7 days of clotrimazole treatment for fungal infections to improve.
Apply clotrimazole to the infected area 2 or 3 times a day for at least 2 weeks.
Do not use clotrimazole cream, spray or solution for more than 4 weeks, unless a doctor tells you to. Fungal infections can become resistant to clotrimazole and it can stop working properly.
The most common side effect of clotrimazole is skin irritation in the area you've treated.
Always wash your hands after treating the infection to stop it from spreading.

About clotrimazole for thrush
-Brand name: Canesten
Clotrimazole is an antifungal medicine.

It's used to treat yeast infections, including thrush in men and women, although thrush is more common in women.

Thrush is caused by a fungus (yeast) and can affect the vagina, the area around the vagina, breasts and nipples or the end of the penis. It can also affect other areas of skin, such as the armpits, top of the inner thighs (groin) and between the fingers. Clotrimazole works by killing the fungus (yeast) that is causing the infection.

Clotrimazole comes as an external cream, an internal cream and a tablet you insert into your vagina (pessary).

For vaginal thrush you can use either pessaries or cream, or both at the same time. The pessaries and internal cream are sometimes sold together.

For thrush on the penis, breasts, armpits, groin or between the fingers you would use the external cream.

Some Canesten products combine clotrimazole with other medicines. These include Canesten Thrush Duo Oral Capsule and External Cream. The capsule contains fluconazole, and Canesten cream contains clotrimazole.

Clotrimazole for thrush is available to buy in pharmacies and shops. Some stronger treatments are only available with a prescription.

Clotrimazole is also available as a cream, spray and solution to treat other fungal infections such as athlete’s foot, ringworm and nappy rash.

Key facts
Clotrimazole works by killing the yeast that causes the fungal infection.
It usually treats thrush within 7 days but it's best to treat the infection for at least 2 weeks to stop it coming back.
The most common side effect is an itching or burning feeling in the area being treated. Clotrimazole cream can damage the latex used in condoms and diaphragms. This can mean your contraception will not work as well as it should.
Do not use clotrimazole for more than 14 days, unless a doctor tells you to. The fungal infection may become resistant and the medicine may stop working properly.

About co-amoxiclav
-Brand name: Augmentin
Co-amoxiclav is an antibiotic used for bacterial infections.

It contains amoxicillin (an antibiotic from the penicillin group of medicines) mixed with clavulanic acid. The clavulanic acid stops bacteria from breaking down amoxicillin, allowing the antibiotic to work better.

It's used in adults and children to treat:

middle ear and sinus infections
throat or lung respiratory tract infections
urinary tract infections
skin and soft tissue infections
dental infections
joint and bone infections (osteomyelitis)
Co-amoxiclav is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets or as a liquid that you swallow.

It's also given by injection, but this is usually only done in hospital.

Key facts
For most infections, you'll start to feel better within a few days.
Usually, you take co-amoxiclav 3 times a day.
The most common side effects of co-amoxiclav are diarrhoea, thrush and feeling or being sick.
Co-amoxiclav liquid can stain teeth. This is not permanent and brushing your teeth will remove any stains.
It's best to avoid alcohol if the medicine makes you feel sick. Drinking large amounts could also make you more likely to get side effects of co-amoxiclav affecting your liver.


About co-beneldopa
-Brand name: Madopar
Co-beneldopa is used to treat the main symptoms of Parkinson's disease. It can help with shaking (tremors), slowness and stiffness. These are called motor symptoms because they affect the way you move.

Parkinson's disease can make it harder for your brain to send messages to your muscles. This can make you shake, make your muscles stiff, or slow your movements. Co-beneldopa works by making it easier for your brain to send messages to your muscles again.

Co-beneldopa contains 2 medicines, called levodopa and benserazide. These are both used for Parkinson's disease.

It's only available on prescription. It comes as standard capsules, slow-release capsules and tablets that dissolve in water (dispersible tablets).

Key facts
Co-beneldopa helps with Parkinson's symptoms that affect your movements. It does not help with other symptoms such as depression and losing your sense of smell.
You'll usually feel co-beneldopa beginning to work after your first dose, but it can take up to 3 weeks to feel the full effect.
Possible side effects include feeling sick or dizzy, problems sleeping and uncontrollable jerking movements.
It's important to take co-beneldopa at the same times each day to control your symptoms.
Do not stop taking this medicine suddenly. If you need to stop taking it, your doctor or specialist nurse will reduce your dose gradually.
If you're having surgery, tell the doctor that you're taking co-beneldopa. You may need to stop taking it before having a general anaesthetic.
If co-beneldopa makes you feel sleepy or dizzy, do not drive, cycle or use tools and machinery until you feel better.

About co-careldopa
-Brand names: Sinemet, Caramet, Apodespan, Lecado
Co-careldopa is used to treat the main symptoms of Parkinson's disease. It can help with shaking (tremors), slowness and stiffness. These are called motor symptoms because they affect the way you move.

Parkinson's disease can make it harder for your brain to send messages to your muscles. This can make you shake, make your muscles stiff or slow your movements. Co-careldopa works by making it easier for your brain to send messages to your muscles again.

Co-careldopa contains 2 medicines, called levodopa and carbidopa. These are both used for Parkinson's disease.

It’s available on prescription only. It comes as tablets, including slow-release tablets that get the medicine into your body gradually.

Duodopa gel
Co-careldopa can sometimes be used as a gel, called Duodopa, that goes through a tube into your small intestine. You’ll need to have surgery to have the tube fitted.

Your specialist may recommend Duodopa gel if your symptoms are difficult to manage and tablets are no longer working.

Key facts
Co-careldopa helps with motor symptoms of Parkinson's disease, such as tremors and stiffness. It does not help with non-motor symptoms such as depression or losing your sense of smell.
You may feel co-careldopa beginning to work after your first dose but it usually takes up to 1 week to feel the full effects.
The most common side effects of co-careldopa are feeling sick or dizzy, problems sleeping and uncontrollable jerking movements.
It's important to take your tablets at the same time each day. This is important to control your symptoms.
Do not stop taking this medicine suddenly. If you need to stop taking it, your doctor or specialist nurse will reduce your dose gradually.


About co-codamol for adults
Co-codamol is a mixture of 2 different painkillers – paracetamol and codeine.

It's used to treat aches and pains including period pain, muscle pain and toothache.

It may help to take co-codamol if everyday painkillers, such as ibuprofen, aspirin or paracetamol on its own, have not worked.

This medicine comes as tablets and capsules, including soluble tablets that you dissolve in water.

Co-codamol tablets and capsules come in 3 strengths. You can buy the lowest strength from pharmacies but the higher strengths are only available on prescription.

For children and young people under 18 years old, read our information on co-codamol for children.

Key facts
Co-codamol takes up to 1 hour to work. It keeps on working for about 5 hours.
The most common side effects of co-codamol are constipation, feeling sick (nausea) or feeling sleepy.
Taking too much co-codamol can be harmful. Do not increase the dose, even if your pain is very bad.
It's possible to become addicted to the codeine in co-codamol, but your doctor will explain how to reduce the risks of becoming addicted.
If you need to take co-codamol for more than a few weeks, your treatment plan may include details of how and when to stop taking this medicine.


About co-codamol for children
Co-codamol is a mixture of 2 different painkillers – paracetamol and codeine.

It's used to treat aches and pains including headaches, migraine, muscle pain and toothache.

Children and young people aged 12 to 17 years old can take co-codamol but only if everyday painkillers, such as ibuprofen or paracetamol on its own, have not worked.

Do not give co-codamol to children under 12 years old. It can cause severe breathing problems.

This medicine comes as tablets and capsules. Co-codamol tablets and capsules come in 3 strengths. You can buy the lowest strength from pharmacies but higher strengths are only available on prescription.

For adults aged 18 years old and over, read our information on co-codamol for adults.

Key facts
Co-codamol takes up to 1 hour to work. It keeps on working for about 5 hours.
Common side effects include constipation, feeling or being sick and feeling sleepy.
Giving your child too much co-codamol can be harmful. Do not increase the dose, even if their pain is very bad.
It's possible to become addicted to the codeine in co-codamol, but your child's doctor will explain how to reduce the risks of this happening.
Co-codamol is also known by many different brand names. Talk to your pharmacist if you have any questions about different brands.


Co-codaprin (aspirin and codeine)
On this page
About co-codaprin
Key facts
Who can and cannot take co-codaprin
How and when to take co-codaprin
Taking co-codaprin with other painkillers
Side effects
How to cope with side effects of co-codaprin
Pregnancy and breastfeeding
Cautions with other medicines
Common questions about co-codaprin
1. About co-codaprin
Co-codaprin is a mixture of 2 different painkillers: aspirin and codeine.

It's used to treat aches and pains, including headaches, muscular pain, migraine and toothache. It can also be used to treat the symptoms of colds and flu.

Aspirin belongs to a group of medicines called non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).

Codeine belongs to a group of medicines called opiates. It affects pain receptors in the central nervous system and the brain to block pain signals to the rest of the body.

It's usually taken when everyday painkillers, such as paracetamol, ibuprofen and aspirin alone, have not worked.

This medicine comes as tablets. It's available on prescription. Co-codaprin is available without a prescription, but only from a pharmacy.

2. Key facts
Co-codaprin is another name for aspirin and codeine.
If you buy co-codaprin from a pharmacy and your pain is not better after 3 days, it's important to ask your doctor for advice about ongoing pain relief.
It's possible to become addicted to the codeine in this medicine if you take it for too long. Only take it when you need it for pain relief.
It's best to take co-codaprin with or just after eating food. You'll be less likely to get mild indigestion or stomach pain. These are common side effects of co-codaprin.
Never give co-codaprin to children under 16 years old, unless their doctor prescribes it. This is because it contains aspirin, which can cause serious side effects in children.
3. Who can and cannot take co-codaprin
Who can take co-codaprin
Most people aged 16 years old and over can safely take co-codaprin. But co-codaprin is not suitable for some people. 

There's a possible link between the aspirin in co-codaprin and Reye's syndrome in children. Reye's syndrome is a very rare condition that can cause serious liver and brain damage.

Do not give co-codaprin to anyone aged 18 years or under who has had their tonsils or adenoids taken out to treat obstructive sleep apnoea.

Important:Children under 16 years
Never give co-codaprin to children younger than 16 years old, unless their doctor prescribes it.

Who may not be able to take co-codaprin
To make sure co-codaprin is safe for you, tell your doctor or pharmacist if you:

have ever had an allergy to aspirin or codeine (or similar painkillers such as ibuprofen and morphine)
have surgery planned – you'll need to stop taking aspirin several days before you have surgery (including dental surgery)
have ever had a blood clotting problem
have ever had a stomach ulcer
have indigestion
have recently had a stroke, although it depends on the kind of stroke you have had (your doctor may recommend that you take low-dose aspirin to prevent another one)
have low blood pressure (hypotension) or high blood pressure (hypertension)
have asthma or lung disease
have liver or kidney problems
have gout – it can get worse for some people who take aspirin
get heavy periods – they can get heavier with aspirin
have a head injury or a condition that causes seizures or fits
have adrenal gland problems or an underactive thyroid gland
have an addiction to alcohol or drugs
have gallstones
have an enlarged prostate
have myasthenia gravis (a rare condition that causes muscle weakness)
have symptoms of ulcerative colitis (a bowel condition)
have glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency
are pregnant, trying to get pregnant or want to breastfeed
4. How and when to take co-codaprin
Follow the instructions that come with your medicine. This is particularly important because the codeine in co-codaprin can be addictive.

Dosage and strength
The strength of co-codaprin appears as 2 numbers on the packet, for example, as 8/400. This means it contains 8mg of codeine and 400mg of aspirin.

The usual dose for adults (over the age of 18) is 1 or 2 co-codaprin tablets, up to 4 times in 24 hours.

Always leave at least 4 hours between doses.

The maximum dose is 8 tablets in 24 hours.

The usual dose for teenagers aged 16 to 18 years old is the same. They should not have co-codaprin, however, if they have had their tonsils or adenoids taken out to treat obstructive sleep apnoea.

Important
Do not take more than 8 co-codaprin tablets in 24 hours.

How to take it
Swallow co-codaprin tablets whole with a drink of water. It's best to take them with or just after food.

How long to take it for
If you have bought co-codaprin from a pharmacy, do not use it for more than 3 days. If you still have pain, talk to your pharmacist or doctor. It's important to ask them for advice about ongoing pain relief.

If your doctor has prescribed co-codaprin for you, follow their advice carefully.

If you take too much
If you take 1 or 2 extra tablets of co-codaprin on a single occasion, it's unlikely to be harmful.

If this happens, wait at least 24 hours before you take any more. Taking more than this can be dangerous.

If you have taken too much co-codaprin by mistake, you may feel very sleepy, sick or dizzy. You may also find it difficult to breathe.

In serious cases, you can become unconscious and may need emergency treatment in hospital.

Urgent advice:Contact 111 for advice now if:
you take more than your usual dose of co-codaprin and feel sleepy, sick or dizzy
Go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111

Immediate action required:Call 999 or go to A&E now if:
you take too much co-codaprin and have difficulty breathing
Information:
If you need to go to A&E, do not drive. Ask someone to drive you or call 999 and ask for an ambulance.

Bring the co-codaprin packet or leaflet inside it, any remaining medicine, and any other medicines you take.

5. Taking co-codaprin with other painkillers
It's safe to take co-codaprin with paracetamol.

Do not take co-codaprin with any other medicines that contain codeine.

Also do not take it with any other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) including aspirin, ibuprofen or naproxen. If you take NSAIDs together, it may increase the chance of you getting side effects like stomach ache or bleeding.

These painkillers are often included in medicines you can buy from pharmacies. For example, Nurofen or Nurofen Plus, or cough and cold remedies such as Nurofen Cold & Flu or Beechams Powders.

Important
Before taking any other medicines, check the label to see if they contain codeine, aspirin, ibuprofen or other NSAIDs.

6. Side effects
Like all medicines, co-codaprin can cause side effects, although not everyone gets them. Many people have no side effects or only minor ones.

Common side effects
These side effects happen in more than 1 in 100 people. Tell your doctor if these side effects bother you or do not go away:

mild indigestion
feeling or being sick (nausea or vomiting)
constipation
feeling sleepy
bleeding more easily than normal – because aspirin thins your blood, it can sometimes make you bleed more easily (for example, you may get nosebleeds, bruise more easily and, if you cut yourself, the bleeding may take longer than normal to stop)
dizziness and vertigo (a sensation of spinning)
headaches
Serious side effects
Serious side effects are rare and happen in less than 1 in 100 people.

Contact a doctor straight away if you have:

a change in your normal heart rate (slower or faster) and you feel dizzy or very tired – these can be signs of a heart problem
a fit or seizure
difficulty breathing or short, shallow breathing
stiffness in your muscles
feeling faint when you stand up or sit quickly – this can be a sign of low blood pressure
coughing up blood or blood in your pee, poo or vomit
dark pee or the whites of your eyes turn yellow – this can be a sign of liver problems
painful joints in your hands and feet – this can be a sign of high levels of uric acid in the blood
swollen hands or feet – this can be a sign of a build-up of fluid in your body
Serious allergic reaction
In rare cases, it's possible to have a serious allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) to co-codaprin.

Immediate action required:Call 999 now if:
your lips, mouth, throat or tongue suddenly become swollen
you're breathing very fast or struggling to breathe (you may become very wheezy or feel like you're choking or gasping for air)
your throat feels tight or you're struggling to swallow
your skin, tongue or lips turn blue, grey or pale (if you have black or brown skin, this may be easier to see on the palms of your hands or soles of your feet)
you suddenly become very confused, drowsy or dizzy
someone faints and cannot be woken up
a child is limp, floppy or not responding like they normally do (their head may fall to the side, backwards or forwards, or they may find it difficult to lift their head or focus on your face)
You or the person who's unwell may also have a rash that's swollen, raised, itchy, blistered or peeling.

These can be signs of a serious allergic reaction and may need immediate treatment in hospital.

Information:
Do not drive yourself to A&E.

The person you speak to at 999 will give you advice about what to do.

Long-term side effects
If you've bought co-codaprin from a pharmacy, do not use it for more than 3 days. If your pain has not gone away, talk to a pharmacist or doctor.

If you need to take co-codaprin for a long time, your body can become tolerant to the codeine in it. That means you need higher doses to control your pain over time.

Some people can become more sensitive to pain (hyperalgesia). If this happens, your doctor will reduce your dose gradually to help these symptoms.

It's possible to become addicted to the codeine in co-codaprin. For this reason, your dose will be reviewed to make sure you're only taking the amount you need to control your pain.

Your treatment plan may include details of how and when you'll stop taking co-codaprin.

If you're having treatment for cancer pain or other severe pain, your pain control will be carefully monitored. Speak to your doctor if you're worried about tolerance, hyperalgesia or becoming addicted.

Other side effects
These are not all the side effects of co-codaprin. For a full list, see the leaflet inside your medicine packet.

Information:
Reporting side effects
You can report any suspected side effect using the Yellow Card safety scheme.

Visit the Yellow Card website for more information about reporting side effects.

7. How to cope with side effects of co-codaprin
What to do about:

mild indigestion – take your co-codaprin with food or just after a meal. If the indigestion still does not go away, it could be a sign that the co-codaprin has caused a stomach ulcer. Talk to your doctor, as they may prescribe something to protect your stomach or switch you to a different medicine.
feeling or being sick (nausea or vomiting) – take co-codaprin with or just after a meal or snack. Feelings of sickness should normally wear off after a few days. Talk to your doctor about taking an anti-sickness medicine if it carries on for longer.
constipation – get more fibre into your diet, such as fresh fruit and vegetables and cereals. Try to drink several glasses of water or another non-alcoholic liquid each day. If you can, it may also help to increase your level of exercise.
feeling sleepy or tired – do not drive, cycle or use tools or machinery if you're feeling this way. Do not drink any alcohol, as this will make you feel more tired.
bleeding more easily than normal – be careful when doing activities that may cause an injury or a cut as it may take longer than usual for any bleeding to stop.
dizziness and vertigo – if you feel dizzy or unsteady, stop what you're doing and sit or lie down until you feel better. Do not drive, cycle or use tools or machinery if you're feeling dizzy. Do not drink alcohol, as it will make you feel worse.
headaches – make sure you rest and drink plenty of fluids. It's best not to drink too much alcohol. Talk to your doctor if the headaches last longer than a week or are severe.
8. Pregnancy and breastfeeding
Co-codaprin and pregnancy
Co-codaprin is not recommended during pregnancy. There are safer medicines you can take. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for advice.

For most women, paracetamol is the best painkiller to take in pregnancy.

Co-codaprin and breastfeeding
Co-codaprin is not recommended while breastfeeding.

For most women it's better to take paracetamol or ibuprofen for pain or a high temperature while you're breastfeeding.

Non-urgent advice:Tell your doctor if you're:
trying to get pregnant
pregnant
breastfeeding
For more information about how pain relief can help you during pregnancy, visit the Best Use of Medicines in Pregnancy (BUMPS) website.



About co-dydramol
-Brand names: Paramol, Remedeine, Remedeine Forte
Co-dydramol is a mixture of 2 different painkillers: paracetamol and dihydrocodeine. Dihydrocodeine belongs to a group of medicines called opiates.

It's used to treat aches and pains, including headaches, migraines, muscle and joint pain, period pain and toothache.

Paracetamol and dihydrocodeine work by blocking messengers in the nerves and brain that tell your body that you're in pain.

You'll usually take co-dydramol when everyday painkillers such as aspirin, ibuprofen and paracetamol have not worked on their own.

Co-dydramol comes in 4 different strengths. You can buy lower-strength tablets from pharmacies. Higher-strength tablets are only available on prescription.

Co-dydramol usually comes as tablets.

Key facts
Co-dydramol takes up to 1 hour to work and keeps working for about 5 hours.
The most common side effects of co-dydramol are constipation and feeling sick or sleepy.
If you've bought co-dydramol from a pharmacy, do not use it for more than 3 days without talking to your doctor.
It's possible to become addicted to the dihydrocodeine in co-dydramol, but your doctor will explain how to reduce the risks of becoming addicted.
If you need to take co-dydramol for more than a few weeks, your treatment plan may include details of how and when to stop taking this medicine.


About coal tar
-Brand names: Alphosyl, Exorex, Neutrogena, Polytar, Psoriderm
Coal tar is a medicine that's used on the skin and scalp to treat itching, irritation and dry patches (scaling and flaking). It also has some antibacterial properties.

It comes as a cream, ointment, scalp lotion, shampoo or a liquid you add to your bath (emulsion additive).

Coal tar can help with problems such as:

eczema
psoriasis
seborrheic dermatitis
dandruff
Most coal tar products are mild. You can buy them from a pharmacy or shop, or get them on prescription.

Coal tar is sometimes combined with other ingredients such as calamine, coconut oil, salicylic acid, dithranol, precipitated sulfur or zinc oxide. These combined products are available as brands called Capasal, Cocois and Sebco.

Key facts
Do not use coal tar that you buy from shops or pharmacies on your face, around your bottom, on your genitals or on broken or infected skin. Talk to your pharmacist about coal tar products for these areas.
For adults, symptoms should improve within 4 weeks of using coal tar treatment. For children, it should be within about 2 weeks. If your symptoms do not get better, speak to your pharmacist or doctor.
Most people do not have any side effects from coal tar, but it can sometimes cause skin irritation, increased sensitivity to the sun (photosensitivity) and acne breakouts.
Coal tar may stain your skin, hair, clothes or bedding and has a strong smell.
Some coal tar products contain ingredients that are flammable, which can cause clothes or bedding to burn more easily. Check your product label.


About codeine
Codeine is a painkiller that is part of a group of medicines called opiates. It's used to treat pain, for example, after an operation or an injury. It's also used for ongoing pain when painkillers such as paracetamol, ibuprofen and aspirin have not worked. Codeine is also used to treat diarrhoea.

It works in the central nervous system and the brain to block pain signals to the rest of the body. It also reduces the anxiety and stress caused by pain.

Codeine is available on prescription and comes as tablets, a liquid you swallow, a syrup (linctus) and as an injection. Codeine injections are usually only given in hospital.

You can also buy lower-strength codeine from a pharmacy. It comes mixed with paracetamol (co-codamol) or with aspirin (co-codaprin) or with ibuprofen (Nurofen Plus).

Key facts
The most common side effects of codeine are constipation, feeling sick (nausea) and feeling sleepy.
It's possible to become addicted to codeine, but your doctor will explain how to reduce the risks of this happening.
If you need to take codeine for more than a few weeks, your treatment plan may include details of how and when to stop taking this medicine.
It may be best not to drink alcohol while taking codeine as you're more likely to get side effects like feeling sleepy.
Do not give codeine to children under 12. Only give codeine to children aged 12 to 18 if everyday painkillers, like paracetamol and ibuprofen, have not worked.


About colchicine
Colchicine is a medicine for treating inflammation and pain. It works by reducing the inflammation caused by the crystals of uric acid that build up in your joints when you have gout. This also helps to reduce pain.

It can be used to:

treat gout
prevent gout from coming back when you first start on long-term medicines like allopurinol
prevent symptoms of familial Mediterranean fever (FMF), an inherited inflammatory condition
Colchicine is available on prescription. It comes as tablets.

Key facts
Colchicine starts to work after around 30 minutes to 2 hours, but it may take a day or two for your pain to start to get better.
It's important to stick to your prescribed dose. Taking even a little bit more can be very serious.
Avoid grapefruit and grapefruit juice while taking colchicine. It can increase the amount of colchicine in your body.
Taking colchicine with or after food may be easier on your stomach.
Drinking too much alcohol can increase the level of uric acid in your blood. This could make your gout worse.

About colecalciferol
-Brand names: BetterYou, Desunin, Stexerol, Strivit
Colecalciferol is a form of vitamin D. It helps your body to take in more calcium and phosphorous from the food you eat, and helps your kidneys to keep more calcium instead of peeing it out.

We usually get our vitamin D through exposure to sunlight and our diet. Not having enough vitamin D in your body can lead to bone conditions such as rickets and osteomalacia in children, and osteoporosis (thinning of the bones) in adults.

Long-term vitamin D deficiency can cause bone loss, muscle weakness, falls and fractures in older people.

Everyone can benefit from taking colecalciferol as a daily vitamin D supplement. Adults who are not at risk of vitamin D deficiency should consider taking a daily supplement of 10 micrograms (mcg) of vitamin D during autumn and winter.

Adults who are at risk of vitamin D deficiency should take a daily supplement of 10 micrograms of vitamin D, throughout the year.

It is recommended that you take vitamin D if you have a deficiency, or to prevent a deficiency if you:

are not often outdoors, for example if you're housebound or in an institution, like a care home
are pregnant or breastfeeding
usually wear clothes that cover up most of your skin when you're outside
have dark skin – darker skin may not make enough vitamin D from sunlight
are 1 to 4 years old or a baby that is breastfed or having less than 500ml of infant formula a day
Vitamin D deficiency is the most common cause of rickets so if your child has low vitamin D levels, your doctor may prescribe colecalciferol for them.

To find out if you have low vitamin D levels, your doctor will give you a blood test. If your levels are severely low, they may prescribe a loading dose course of vitamin D. This is a high strength dose that is only available on prescription.

If your vitamin D levels are OK, or you want to prevent deficiency, you can buy lower dose colecalciferol from pharmacies and shops.

Colecalciferol comes as chewable, dissolvable (soluble) and melt-in-the-mouth (orodispersible) tablets, capsules, a syrup, and oral drops.

There is also a type of vitamin D called calcipotriol, which sounds similar to colecalciferol. Calcipotriol is used to treat the skin condition caused by plaque psoriasis.

Key facts
Taking low doses of colecalciferol daily is safe and does not normally cause side effects.
Taking too much colecalciferol can cause calcium and phosphate to build up in your body (hypercalcaemia).
It may take a few weeks or months to raise your vitamin D levels after a loading dose and you may not feel any different. You'll usually take a blood test 1 month after starting your treatment and then again after 3 to 6 months to check your levels.
Most of your vitamin D comes from exposure to sunlight but you can also get it from your diet by eating more oily fish and foods with added nutrients.
There are many different brands of colecalciferol. Other brand names include Hux D3, Lamberts, Pro D3, Solgar and SunVit.


About continuous combined HRT
-Brand names: Evorel Conti, Kliovance, Kliofem, Femoston Conti, FemSeven Conti
Continuous combined hormone replacement therapy (HRT) is a medicine used to treat hot flushes, mood swings, vaginal dryness and other symptoms of the menopause.

It can also prevent weakening bones (oesteoporosis) which is common after the menopause.

Menopause is when your periods stop due to lower hormone levels. It usually affects women between the ages of 45 and 55, but it can happen earlier. It affects anyone who has periods.

Your doctor will usually recommended continuous combined HRT if you are post-menopause (you have not had a period for 1 year or more).

It is not suitable if you have menopause symptoms but are still having periods (perimenopause), or within 12 months of your last period, because it may cause irregular bleeding. In these cases your doctor will usually recommend sequential combined HRT instead.

Menopause symptoms are caused by a drop in the levels of oestrogen and progesterone produced in the ovaries. There are different types of oestrogen and progesterone, called oestrogens and progestogens. Combined HRT uses both to raise the levels of these hormones in your body.

It's important to take both oestrogen and progestogen, unless you've had a hysterectomy (surgery to remove your womb). This is because taking oestrogen-based HRT on its own can thicken the womb lining. This slightly increases the risk of womb cancer. Taking progestogen together with oestrogen reduces the risk.

Continuous combined HRT is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets, capsules and patches.

Key facts
You take continuous combined HRT every day without a break.
HRT can take up to 3 months to work fully to improve your symptoms.
Common side effects include headache, breast tenderness and vaginal bleeding but these normally improve in the first few months of treatment.
If you feel that the HRT you're taking is not helping your symptoms, talk to a doctor. It can take time to find the right type and dose to suit you.
It's common to take combined HRT for 2 to 5 years, and then try stopping to see if your menopause symptoms have improved. If your symptoms last for longer, your doctor can advise on the benefits and risks of continuing to take HRT.
It's important to see your doctor at least once a year for a check-up and to review whether you need to keep taking HRT.


About medroxyprogesterone contraceptive injections
-Brand names: Depo-Provera, Sayana Press
Medroxyprogesterone injections are used as contraception. The injection is long lasting and stops you from getting pregnant for at least 3 months after you have it.

Medroxyprogesterone (also known as medroxyprogesterone acetate) is a type of medicine called a progestogen. Progestogens are similar to a natural hormone made in the body called progesterone.

Medroxyprogesterone works in the same way as natural progesterone, but has stronger effects. The injection stops your body from releasing an egg each month and also makes it less likely that an egg would be fertilised or develop.

Medroxyprogesterone contraceptive injections are only available on prescription. You'll usually have them at a GP surgery, contraception clinic or sexual health clinic.

Find a sexual health clinic
The most commonly used brand is called Depo-Provera. There is another brand called Sayana Press that you can be taught to give yourself.

Other types of medroxyprogesterone
Medroxyprogesterone also comes as tablets used to treat hormonal conditions including heavy periods, endometriosis, polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and hot flushes caused by treatment for prostate cancer.

It also comes mixed with another hormone called oestrogen as a type of hormone replacement therapy (HRT), for menopause symptoms.

High dose medroxyprogesterone tablets (100mg, 200mg and 400mg) are used to treat some types of cancer.

Read about medroxyprogesterone for treating cancer from Macmillan

Key facts
The medroxyprogesterone contraceptive injection is more than 99% effective.
If you have the injection in the first 5 days of your period, it will start working straight away.
If you have the injection at another time or if you have not been having periods, it will take 7 days to start working. You'll need to use another type of contraception such as condoms for 7 days.
After you've had the injection your fertility should eventually come back, but how long this takes varies from a few months to over a year.
Common side effects include headaches, stomach pain and mood changes.
Medroxyprogesterone injections can affect your periods. They may become either heavier or lighter. Sometimes, it can improve your monthly cycle by helping with heavy bleeding, period pain or premenstrual symptoms.


Topical corticosteroids
Topical corticosteroids are a type of steroid medicine applied directly to the skin to reduce inflammation and irritation.

Topical corticosteroids are available in several different forms, including:

creams
lotions
gels
mousses
ointments
tapes and bandages
solutions
They're available in 4 different strengths (potencies):

mild
moderate
potent
very potent
Mild corticosteroids, such as clobetasone, hydrocortisone skin cream and hydrocortisone for piles and itchy bottom, can often be bought over the counter from pharmacies.

Stronger types, such as beclometasone, betamethasone, clobetasol, fluticasone and mometasone, are only available on prescription.

Read about other types of corticosteroids, including tablets, capsules, inhalers and injected corticosteroids.

Corticosteroids should not be confused with anabolic steroids.

Conditions treated with topical corticosteroids
Conditions widely treated with topical corticosteroids include:

eczema – such as atopic eczema
contact dermatitis – which causes symptoms such as dandruff and scaly patches on the skin
psoriasis
Topical corticosteroids cannot cure these conditions, but can help relieve the symptoms.

Who can use topical corticosteroids
Most adults and children can use topical corticosteroids safely, but there are situations when they are not recommended.

They should not be used if:

you have infected skin, unless advised by a doctor
you have certain skin conditions, including rosacea and acne
Most topical corticosteroids are considered safe to use during pregnancy or breastfeeding. Your doctor will consider the area of skin where you need to use it, how often you'll use it and the condition of your skin. You should wash off any steroid cream applied to your breasts before feeding your baby.

Very potent topical corticosteroids are not usually prescribed for pregnant or breastfeeding women, or for very young children. Sometimes you may be prescribed them under the supervision of a skincare specialist (dermatologist).

How to use topical corticosteroids
Unless instructed otherwise by your doctor, follow the directions on the patient information leaflet that comes with the medicine. This will give details of how much to apply and how often.

Most people only need to use the medicine once or twice a day for 3 to 7 days. Occasionally a doctor may suggest using it less frequently over a longer period of time.

The medicine should only be applied to affected areas of skin. Gently smooth a thin layer onto your skin in the direction the hair grows. Wash your hands before and after you've applied the medicine, unless you are treating an area on your hands.

If you're using both topical corticosteroids and emollients, wait 20 to 30 minutes between using them.

Fingertip units
Sometimes, the amount of medicine you're advised to use will be given in fingertip units (FTUs).

A FTU (about 500mg) is the amount needed to squeeze a line from the tip of an adult finger to the first crease of the finger. It should be enough to treat an area of skin double the size of the flat of your hand with your fingers together.

The recommended dosage will depend on what part of the body is being treated. This is because the skin is thinner in certain parts of the body and more sensitive to the effects of corticosteroids.

For adults, the recommended FTUs to be applied in a single dose are:

0.5 FTU for genitals
1 FTU for hands, elbows or knees
1.5 FTUs for the feet, including the soles
2.5 FTUs for the face and neck
3 FTUs for the scalp
4 FTUs for a hand and arm together, or the buttocks
8 FTUs for 1 leg and foot, the chest or back
For children, the recommended FTUs will depend on their age. A GP can advise you on this.

Side effects of topical corticosteroids
If you use them correctly, topical corticosteroids rarely have serious side effects.

The most common side effect of topical corticosteroids is a burning or stinging sensation when the medicine is applied. However, this usually improves as your skin gets used to the treatment.

Less common side effects can include:

worsening or spreading of a skin infection you already have
inflamed hair follicles (folliculitis)
thinning of the skin, which can make the affected skin more vulnerable to damage; for example, you may bruise more easily
stretch marks, which are likely to be permanent, although they'll probably become less noticeable over time
contact dermatitis, which is a skin irritation caused by a mild allergic reaction to the substances in a particular topical corticosteroid
acne, or worsening of acne
rosacea, which is a condition that causes the face to become red and flushed
changes in skin colour – this is usually more noticeable in people with dark skin
excessive hair growth on the area of skin being treated
Side effects are more likely if you're:

using a more potent corticosteroid
using it for a very long time, or over a large area
The elderly and very young are more vulnerable to side effects.

If potent or very potent topical corticosteroids are used for a long time or over a large area, there's a risk of the medicine being absorbed into the bloodstream and causing internal side effects, such as:

decreased growth in children
Cushing's syndrome
This is not a full list of all the possible side effects. For more information on side effects, see the leaflet that comes with the medicine.

If you're using a potent or very potent topical corticosteroid for several weeks or more, you may be given a steroid treatment card that explains how you can reduce the risk of side effects.

If you need any medical or dental treatment, show your steroid treatment card to the doctor, dentist or pharmacist so they know that you're using topical corticosteroids.

Withdrawal side effects
If you stop using topical corticosteroids after using them continuously for a long time (usually over 12 months in adults), you may have a withdrawal reaction. These can sometimes be severe. Your doctor may advise stopping the treatment gradually to avoid this.

Withdrawal side effects can include:

redness or changes in skin colour (this may not be as noticeable on brown or black skin)
burning, stinging, itching or peeling of the skin, or oozing, open sores
a flare up of the skin condition you were treating
If you’ve been using topical corticosteroids for a long time, it’s a good idea to ask your doctor to review your treatment.

Reporting side effects
The Yellow Card Scheme allows you to report suspected side effects from any type of medicine you're taking. It's run by the medicines safety watchdog called the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA).



Steroids
Steroids, also called corticosteroids, are anti-inflammatory medicines used to treat a range of conditions.

They're different from anabolic steroids, which are often used illegally by some people to increase their muscle mass.

Types of steroids
Steroids come in many different forms.

The main types are:

tablets and liquids – such as prednisolone
inhalers – such as beclometasone and fluticasone
nasal sprays – such as beclometasone and fluticasone
injections (given into joints, muscles or blood vessels) – such as methylprednisolone
creams, lotions and gels – such as hydrocortisone for skin
Most steroids are only available on prescription, but a few (such as some creams or nasal sprays) can be bought from pharmacies and shops.

Side effects of steroids
Steroids do not tend to cause significant side effects if they're taken for a short time or at a low dose.

But sometimes they can cause unpleasant side effects, such as an increased appetite, mood changes and difficulty sleeping (insomnia). This is most common with steroid tablets.

The side effects will usually pass once you finish the treatment, but do not stop taking your medicine without speaking to your doctor. Your doctor will advise you on how to gradually reduce your dose if necessary. Stopping a prescribed course of medicine suddenly can cause further unpleasant side effects (withdrawal symptoms).

Read more about the side effects of:

steroid tablets
steroid inhalers
steroid nasal sprays
steroid injections
steroid creams
You can report any suspected side effect to the Yellow Card Scheme.

Steroid cards
If you need to take high doses of steroids you may need to carry a blue steroid treatment card or a red steroid emergency card. Ask your doctor about these.

The blue steroid treatment card has details of your treatment and how you can reduce the risks of side effects.

The red steroid emergency card warns healthcare professionals that you're taking steroids in case you need emergency treatment.

If you need any medical or dental treatment, show your blue or red steroid card to the doctor, dentist or pharmacist so that they know you're taking steroids.

Uses for steroids
Steroids can be used to treat a wide range of conditions, including:

asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
hay fever
severe hives
eczema
painful joints or muscles – such as arthritis, tennis elbow and frozen shoulder
pain caused by an irritated or trapped nerve – such as severe sciatica
inflammatory bowel disease – such as Crohn's disease
lupus
multiple sclerosis (MS)
How steroids work
Steroids are a man-made version of hormones normally produced by the adrenal glands which are 2 small glands found above the kidneys.

Steroids reduce redness and swelling (inflammation). This can help with inflammatory conditions such as asthma and eczema.

Steroids also reduce the activity of the immune system, which is the body's natural defence against illness and infection.

This can help treat autoimmune conditions, such as rheumatoid arthritis or lupus, which are caused by the immune system mistakenly attacking the body.



About cyanocobalamin
-Brand name: Orobalin
Cyanocobalamin is a manufactured version of vitamin B12. It's used to treat and prevent vitamin B12 deficiency anaemia (when you have low levels of this vitamin in your body). It works by increasing your levels of vitamin B12.

Your body needs vitamin B12 to make red blood cells and keep your nervous system healthy. You can get vitamin B12 from your food or supplements, but sometimes there may not be enough of it in what you eat. This can happen if you eat a vegan diet or if you do not regularly eat meat, fish or dairy products.

Some conditions or treatments can stop you absorbing enough vitamin B12 from the food you eat. These include:

pernicious anaemia
low stomach acid due to swelling (inflammation) in the stomach lining, or certain medicines
stomach surgery (gastrectomy)
inflammation in your intestines because of conditions like Crohn's disease or coeliac disease
an infection in your stomach or intestine
Cyanocobalamin comes as tablets that may be available on prescription.

It can also be given as an injection, but this is generally not available on the NHS. If your doctor prescribes vitamin B12 injections, they'll usually give you hydroxocobalamin, another type of vitamin B12.

You can also buy vitamin B12 supplements containing cyanocobalamin from pharmacies and shops. These come as tablets, capsules, mouth sprays and drops.

Key facts
You'll usually take cyanocobalamin tablets every day to prevent or treat vitamin B12 deficiency. However, you may also need vitamin B12 injections at first to boost your levels.
It may take a few weeks before your vitamin B12 levels and symptoms (such as extreme tiredness or lack of energy) start to improve.
Most people do not have any side effects from cyanocobalamin tablets.
Some people may be able to stop taking cyanocobalamin when their vitamin B12 blood levels are back to normal.
You may have regular blood tests while taking cyanocobalamin, to monitor the levels of vitamin B12 in your blood.


About cyclizine
Cyclizine is an anti-sickness medicine. It's an antihistamine that is used to help stop you feeling or being sick (nausea or vomiting).

It works by blocking a chemical called histamine in your brain that can make you feel sick.

You can take cyclizine to treat morning sickness, vertigo and motion sickness.

You can also take it to treat sickness caused by general anaesthetics after surgery, cancer treatment or other medicines, and some inner ear problems such as Ménière's disease.

Cyclizine is available on prescription and to buy from pharmacies. It comes as tablets and is also available as an injection.

Key facts
You can usually take cyclizine when you need it, up to 3 times a day.
Common side effects include feeling sleepy and blurred vision.
Cyclizine starts to work about 30 minutes after taking it. You should feel better after 1 to 2 hours.
Do not drive, cycle or operate heavy machinery if cyclizine makes you feel sleepy or dizzy or affects your concentration.
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking cyclizine. Alcohol increases the risk of side effects.


About dabigatran
Dabigatran is a type of medicine known as an anticoagulant.

It makes your blood flow through your veins more easily. This means your blood will be less likely to make a dangerous blood clot.

It's used to treat people who have had a health problem caused by a blood clot, such as:

a stroke
a heart attack
a blood clot in the leg (deep vein thrombosis, or DVT)
a blood clot in the lungs (pulmonary embolism)
It's also used to prevent blood clots if you're at high risk of having them in the future.

People who are at high risk include those who have:

an irregular heartbeat (atrial fibrillation)
recently had surgery to replace a hip or knee joint
Dabigatran is only available on prescription. It comes as capsules.

Key facts
You'll usually take dabigatran twice a day.
You can take dabigatran with or without food.
The most common side effect of dabigatran is bleeding more easily than normal, such as having nosebleeds, heavier periods, bleeding gums and bruising.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you an anticoagulant alert card. Always carry this with you. Show it to your doctor or dentist before you have surgery or dental treatment. It's important they know you're taking dabigatran, as it may put you at risk of bleeding.
You can drink alcohol while taking dabigatran. But heavy drinking, especially binge drinking, can increase the effect of dabigatran and make you more likely to bleed.


About dapagliflozin
-Brand name: Forxiga
Dapagliflozin is mainly used to treat type 2 diabetes.

It can also be used to treat heart failure and chronic kidney disease (CKD).

Dapagliflozin is usually prescribed if:

you have type 2 diabetes and cannot take metformin
the medicine you have been taking is not controlling your blood sugar properly – this may mean taking dapagliflozin with other diabetes medicines at the same time
you have heart failure – it can reduce the risk of the heart getting weaker, and help symptoms such as tiredness
you have chronic kidney disease – it helps to slow the rate at which the condition gets worse
Dapagliflozin is only available on prescription and comes as tablets.

Dapagliflozin also comes combined with other diabetes medicines. Brand names include Xigduo (dapagliflozin with metformin) and Qtern (dapagliflozin with saxagliptin).

Key facts
Dapagliflozin works on your kidneys. It increases the amount of sugar removed from your body when you pee. It can also reduce the amount of work your heart needs to do to pump blood around the body.
Dapagliflozin usually starts to work (reduce your blood glucose levels) after about 2 hours, but it may take up to a week for it to take full effect
If you're taking dapagliflozin with other diabetes medicines, it can sometimes cause low blood sugar (hypoglycaemia). It's a good idea to always carry sweets or fruit juice with you in case this happens.
Unlike some diabetes medicines, dapagliflozin does not make you put on weight. In fact, some people find they lose weight.
If you have diabetes, you're entitled to free prescriptions for all of your medicines, not just your diabetes ones.


Decongestants
Decongestants are a type of medicine that can provide short-term relief for a blocked or stuffy nose (nasal congestion).

They can help ease the symptoms of conditions such as colds and flu, hay fever and other allergic reactions, catarrh and sinusitis.

They work by reducing the swelling of the blood vessels in your nose, which helps to open the airways.

Examples include pseudoephedrine (sometimes called by the brand name Sudafed).

Types of decongestants
Decongestants are available as:

nasal sprays
drops
tablets or capsules
liquids or syrups
flavoured powders to dissolve in hot water
Some products may just contain decongestant medicine, but many are sold as "all-in-1" remedies that contain decongestants, painkillers or antihistamines.

Most decongestants can be bought over the counter from pharmacies without a prescription.

Who can take decongestants
Most people can use decongestants safely, but they're not suitable for everyone.

They should not be used by the following groups of people without getting advice from a pharmacist or GP first:

people taking other medicines
people with diabetes
people with high blood pressure
people with an overactive thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism)
men with an enlarged prostate
people with liver, kidney, heart or circulation problems
people with increased pressure in the eye glaucoma
Babies and children
Decongestants should not be given to children under 6 years of age.

Children aged 6 to 11 should take them for no longer than 5 days. Ask a pharmacist for advice about this.

Always follow the instructions that come with the packet.

Pregnant and breastfeeding women
It's not clear whether it's safe to take any type of decongestant if you're pregnant, so you should only use them if told to by a healthcare professional.

Decongestants that come as tablets, liquids or powders that you swallow are not recommended if you're breastfeeding.

Some decongestants that come as nose sprays or drops are safe to use if you're breastfeeding, but check with a pharmacist or GP first before using them.

The patient information leaflet that comes with your medicine will say who should not use it and who should get advice before using it.

How to use decongestants
Most decongestants should only be used between 1 and 4 times a day.

Check the patient information leaflet that comes with your medicine for advice about how much to take and how often to take it.

If you're not sure, ask a pharmacist for advice.

Decongestant nasal sprays and drops should not be used for more than a week at a time because using them for too long can make your stuffiness worse.

Speak to a GP if your symptoms do not improve after this time.

Side effects of decongestants
Decongestant medicines do not usually have side effects, and any side effects you may experience are usually mild.

Possible side effects can include:

feeling sleepy (look for non-drowsy medicines)
irritation of the lining of your nose
headaches
feeling or being sick
a dry mouth
feeling restless or agitated
a rash
These side effects should go away once you stop taking the medicine.

More serious side effects can also happen, such as hallucinations and severe allergic reactions (anaphylaxis), but these are very rare.

Taking decongestants with other medicines
Ask a pharmacist or GP before taking decongestants if you're taking other medicines.

Decongestants can increase or decrease the effect of some other medicines.

For example, taking decongestants alongside some antidepressants can cause a dangerous rise in blood pressure.

It's also important to be careful when taking other medicines if you're using an "all-in-1" decongestant remedy.

"All-in-1" decongestants also contain painkillers or antihistamines, so it could be dangerous to take extra doses of these medicines at the same time.


About dexamethasone eye drops
-Brand names: Dexafree, Dropodex, Eythalm, Maxidex
Dexamethasone eye drops are a type of medicine called a steroid (corticosteroid). Steroids are copies of a hormone your body makes naturally. They're not the same as anabolic steroids.

They're used to treat eye inflammation by reducing swelling, redness and irritation. These can be symptoms of eye injuries, surgery, or damage caused by severe allergies or chemicals.

It's also safe to use dexamethasone eye drops in the ear but only when you've been advised to do so by a doctor.

Dexamethasone eye drops come in eye-drop bottles, which may have a preservative in them, or in single dose droppers that are preservative-free. It's available on prescription only.

Dexamethasone eye drops and ointment are also available combined with antibiotics to treat eye inflammation and infection. Brand names include Maxitrol, Sofradex or Tobradex for eyes and Sofradex or Otomize for ears.

Dexamethasone also comes as tablets, a liquid that you swallow, and injections. These are used to treat severe allergy symptoms, croup and lupus. It is also used in hospitals for severe cases of COVID-19 and other serious infections.

Key facts
You'll usually use dexamethasone eye drops 4 to 6 times a day. To get the full benefit, use them regularly, as recommended by your doctor.
Dexamethasone eye drops start to work within a couple of days.
If you've been using dexamethasone eye drops for more than 1 to 2 weeks, your doctor may ask you to gradually reduce how often you use them each day until you stop completely.
Common side effects include eye irritation and blurred vision.


About dexamethasone tablets and liquid
-Brand names: Neofordex, Glensoludex, Martapan
Dexamethasone is a type of medicine called a steroid (or corticosteroid). Steroids are copies of a hormone your body makes naturally. They're not the same as anabolic steroids.

Dexamethasone tablets and liquid are used to treat a wide range of health conditions. These include:

severe skin conditions
severe allergies (anaphylaxis)
sickness (nausea and vomiting)
croup
swelling (inflammation) in your eye
autoimmune conditions, such as lupus
It's used in hospitals as a treatment for severe COVID-19 and other serious infections.

It can also help reduce the side effects of cancer treatment, or some of your symptoms if you're having end of life care.

It's available on prescription only and comes as tablets, soluble tablets and as a liquid you drink. It can be given by injection but this is usually only done in hospital.

Dexamethasone also comes as eye drops and a spray to treat eye and ear infections.

Key facts
You usually take dexamethasone tablets or liquid once a day.
It's best to take it in the morning so it does not affect your sleep.
Common side effects include sleep problems, mood changes and indigestion.
Taking dexamethasone tablets or liquid can mean you're more likely to get infections. Tell your doctor if you get an infection, such as COVID-19, or if you come into contact with anyone who has measles, chickenpox or shingles while you're taking dexamethasone.
If you take dexamethasone for more than 3 weeks, or take more than 6mg a day, you'll get a blue steroid card. You may also need to carry a red steroid emergency card. Ask your pharmacist or doctor about both of these.
You'll need to carry a red steroid emergency card if you take dexamethasone to treat Addison's disease, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, other adrenal problems, adrenal insufficiency or hypothalamic or pituitary disorder.



About diazepam
Diazepam belongs to a group of medicines called benzodiazepines.

It's used to treat anxiety, muscle spasms and seizures or fits. It's also used in hospital to reduce alcohol withdrawal symptoms, such as sweating or difficulty sleeping.

It can also be taken to help you relax before an operation or other medical or dental treatments. This is known as a pre-med.

It works by increasing the levels of a calming chemical in your brain called gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA).

Diazepam is available on prescription only.

It comes as tablets, a liquid that you swallow, or in a rectal tube – medicine that's squeezed into your bottom (anus). It can also be given as an injection in hospital.

Key facts
The most common side effect of diazepam is feeling drowsy.
You're not recommended to use diazepam for longer than 4 weeks.
If you take diazepam and feel sleepy, do not drive, cycle or use tools or machines.
Do not drink alcohol while taking diazepam. It can make you sleep very deeply. You may have breathing problems and difficulty waking up.
It's possible to get addicted to diazepam, but you're less likely to get addicted if you take it at the lowest dose that helps your symptoms, for up to 4 weeks.
Diazepam is also known as Valium, but this brand is not available in the UK anymore.


About diclofenac
-Brand names: Voltarol, Dicloflex, Diclomax, Econac, Motifene
Diclofenac is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) medicine that reduces swelling (inflammation) and pain.

It's used to treat aches and pains, as well as problems with joints, muscles and bones. This includes arthritis, sprains, back pain, migraines or after dental surgery.

There are different types of diclofenac. It comes as:

tablets and capsules, including slow-release tablets and capsules, that are prescription only
suppositories that are prescription only
gel, patches and plasters for joint pain that you can buy from pharmacies
injection or as eyedrops that are usually given in hospital
a high strength gel used to treat dry, scaly patches of skin caused by sun damage (actinic keratoses) – this treatment is usually started after assessment by a dermatologist and is not covered here
Key facts
Diclofenac tablets and capsules take 20 to 30 minutes to work. Suppositories take a few hours to work and gel, plasters and patches can take up to 1 to 2 days.
It's best to take the lowest dose of diclofenac for the shortest time to control your symptoms. Taking diclofenac long term, or in high doses, can cause damage to the stomach such as an ulcer.
Take diclofenac tablets or capsules with a meal or snack, or just after eating.
Common side effects are stomach pain, feeling or being sick and rashes.
Diclofenac gel and plasters can be used twice a day to target pain in a particular area of your body.


About digoxin
-Brand name: Lanoxin
Digoxin is a type of medicine called a cardiac glycoside.

It's used to control some heart problems, such as irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias) including atrial fibrillation.

It can also help to manage the symptoms of heart failure, usually with other medicines. It's normally recommended when these other medicines have not been enough to control your symptoms on their own.

It works by slowing down your heart rate and making your heart beat more strongly, which makes it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body.

Digoxin is only available on prescription.

It comes as tablets and as a liquid (sometimes called an elixir). It can also be given as an injection, but this is usually done in hospital.

Key facts
It can take several weeks for digoxin to start working. You will not feel better straight away but you should notice improvements after a few weeks.
Common side effects include feeling dizzy, feeling or being sick, diarrhoea, changes in your vision or skin rashes
If digoxin makes you feel dizzy it's best not to drink alcohol. Wait to see how the medicine affects you.
You can drive or ride a bike if you feel OK while taking it. Do not drive or cycle if you feel dizzy or have problems with your vision.
You'll need regular blood tests while taking digoxin to check that your kidneys are healthy and you have the right amount of potassium, magnesium and calcium in your blood.
If you need an operation, tell your doctor that you're taking digoxin. They'll tell you if you need to stop taking it before your treatment.


About dihydrocodeine
-Brand names: DHC Continus, DF118 Forte
Dihydrocodeine is an opioid painkiller. It's used to treat moderate to severe pain, such as after an operation or a serious injury.

It's also used for long-term pain if weaker painkillers, such as paracetamol, ibuprofen and aspirin, have not worked.

It works by blocking pain signals from the central nervous system and the brain.

Dihydrocodeine is only available on prescription.

It comes as standard tablets, slow-release tablets and as a liquid that you swallow. It can also be given by an injection into the muscle or under the skin. This is usually done in hospital.

Co-dydramol, Paramol, Remedeine and Remedeine Forte are brand names that contain dihydrocodeine and paracetamol.

Key facts
Standard dihydrocodeine tablets take between 1 and a half and 2 hours to work fully. Slow-release tablets may take longer to work but they last longer.
It's possible to become addicted to dihydrocodeine, but your doctor will explain how to reduce the risks of becoming addicted.
If you need to take dihydrocodeine for more than a few weeks, your treatment plan may include details of how and when to stop taking this medicine.
The most common side effects are feeling or being sick, feeling drowsy, and constipation.


About diltiazem
-Brand names: Adizem, Angitil, Tildiem, Viazem, Zemtard
Diltiazem is a medicine used to treat high blood pressure.

If you have high blood pressure, taking diltiazem helps to prevent coronary heart disease, heart attacks and strokes.

It works by lowering your blood pressure and making it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body.

Diltiazem is also used to:

prevent chest pain caused by angina
reduce the frequency of attacks in Raynaud's phenomenon
help heal an anal fissure
Diltiazem is available on prescription only. It comes as tablets or capsules to treat high blood pressure, angina or Raynaud's. It's also available as a cream or ointment to treat anal fissures.

Key facts
Diltiazem starts to work on the day you start taking it, but for high blood pressure and angina it may take a couple of weeks to work fully.
You can take diltiazem at any time of day. Try to make sure it's around the same time or times every day.
Common side effects include swollen hands, ankles or feet, a pounding heartbeat (palpitations) and constipation.
If diltiazem makes you feel dizzy or drowsy, do not drive a car, ride a bike, or use tools or machinery until you feel better.



Diphenhydramine
-Brand names: Nytol Original, Boots Sleepeaze
On this page
About diphenhydramine
Key facts
Who can and cannot take diphenhydramine
How and when to take or use diphenhydramine
Side effects
How to cope with side effects of diphenhydramine
Pregnancy and breastfeeding
Cautions with other medicines
Common questions about diphenhydramine
1. About diphenhydramine
Diphenhydramine is an antihistamine medicine that relieves the symptoms of allergies. It's known as a drowsy (sedating) antihistamine and is more likely to make you feel sleepy than other antihistamines. It's used for:

short-term sleep problems (insomnia), including when a cough, cold or itching is keeping you awake at night
cough and cold symptoms
hay fever
eczema, hives (urticaria) and insect bites and stings
You can buy diphenhydramine from pharmacies and it is also available on prescription.

It comes as tablets and a liquid that you swallow. For skin allergies like hives or bites and stings it's also available as a cream. The cream is much less likely to make you feel sleepy than the tablets or liquid.

You can also buy it mixed with other medicines, such as levomenthol, paracetamol and pseudoephedrine, to treat cough and cold symptoms.

2. Key facts
To help you sleep, you'll usually take diphenhydramine 20 minutes before you go to bed. It normally takes about 30 minutes to work.
Common side effects include feeling sleepy, dizzy or unsteady on your feet. You may also have difficulty concentrating and have a dry mouth.
You can become dependent on diphenhydramine if you take it continuously for a period of time. It may also stop working as well. Speak to your doctor if you need to take it for more than 2 weeks.
Do not drink alcohol while taking diphenhydramine. Alcohol increases the risk of side effects.
When diphenhydramine is mixed with other medicines, brand names include Benylin Chesty Coughs, Benylin Children's Night Coughs, Covonia Night Time Formula, Panadol Night Pain and Unicough.
3. Who can and cannot take diphenhydramine
Diphenhydramine can be taken by most adults and young people aged 16 years and above. You can sometimes give diphenhydramine to children, depending on their age and their symptoms. Ask your pharmacist for advice.

Giving diphenhydramine to children
For cough and cold symptoms, you can give diphenhydramine tablets and liquid to children over the age of 6. For allergy symptoms, you can give it to children over 12. Check with your pharmacist or doctor to make sure a product is suitable for your child.

You can also use diphenhydramine cream on children for:

insect bites and stings
eczema
Important:Warning for children
Do not give your child diphenhydramine to help them get to sleep. Diphenhydramine is only suitable for sleep problems in people aged 16 years and above.

Who may not be able to take diphenhydramine
Diphenhydramine is not suitable for some people. To make sure it's safe for you, tell your doctor or pharmacist if you:

have ever had an allergic reaction to diphenhydramine or any other medicine
have lung problems, such as asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), or an illness that creates a lot of phlegm
have an eye problem called primary angle closure glaucoma
have a blockage in your stomach or gut
have kidney or liver problems
have problems peeing or emptying your bladder
have epilepsy or any other health problem that causes fits (seizures)
are due to have an allergy test – diphenhydramine can affect your results, so you may need to stop taking it a few days before your test – ask a pharmacist or your doctor for advice
are unable to have any alcohol – some liquid diphenhydramine products contain a small amount of alcohol, so check the ingredients and the packaging carefully
4. How and when to take or use diphenhydramine
If you or your child have been prescribed diphenhydramine, follow your doctor's instructions about how and when to take it.

Only take or use diphenhydramine when you need it, for example if you're unable to sleep because you're worrying about something or your cold symptoms are keeping you awake.

If you've bought diphenhydramine or any medicine containing diphenhydramine from a pharmacy, follow the instructions that come with the packet, or ask a pharmacist for advice.

The instructions will be different depending on the type of medicine you buy, and the other medicines it's mixed with.

Dosage
If you're aged over 65, start with the lower dose, as you may be more likely to get side effects.

The usual dose depends on the type of diphenhydramine medicine you're taking, and why.

Dosage for short-term insomnia
Diphenhydramine comes as 25mg and 50mg tablets. You'll usually take 50mg, 20 minutes before you go to bed.

Dosage for cough and cold symptoms
Diphenhydramine comes mixed with other medicines to treat the symptoms of coughs and colds. It comes as tablets and as a liquid that you swallow. The usual dose depends on the type of medicine you're taking. Check the instructions on the packaging carefully, or ask your doctor or pharmacist if you're unsure.

Dosage for hay fever and allergies
Diphenhydramine comes as 25mg and 50mg tablets. The usual dose is 25mg or 50mg, taken 3 or 4 times a day. Try to space your doses evenly throughout the day.

Dosage for insect bites, stings and eczema
Diphenhydramine comes as a cream which you use once or twice a day. You'll only need a small amount, enough for a thin layer.

How to take or use it
You can take diphenhydramine tablets and liquid with or without food.

How to take diphenhydramine tablets
Always take your diphenhydramine tablets with a drink of water. Swallow them whole. Do not chew them.

How to take diphenhydramine liquid
Liquid medicines containing diphenhydramine come with a plastic syringe or spoon to help you measure the right dose. If you do not have a syringe or spoon, ask your pharmacist for one. Do not use a kitchen teaspoon as it will not measure the right amount.

How to use diphenhydramine cream
With the cream, put a small amount onto the affected area and smooth it in gently. Do not use it on large areas of skin. Keep the cream away from your eyes, mouth and nose. Remember to wash your hands afterwards, unless you're treating your hands.

What if I forget to take or use it?
If you're taking diphenhydramine to help you sleep and you forget to take it by bedtime, skip your missed dose and start again the next evening.

If you're taking any other medicine containing diphenhydramine and forget to take a dose, take your medicine when you next need it to ease your symptoms.

Never take 2 doses at the same time. Never take an extra dose to make up for a forgotten one.

If you forget doses often, it may help to set an alarm to remind you. You could also ask your pharmacist for advice on other ways to help you remember to take your medicine.

What if I take or use too much?
Too much diphenhydramine can be dangerous.

If you've taken more than the usual dose you may:

feel very sleepy
feel sick (nauseous)
get blurry eyesight
feel your heart beating very fast
In serious cases you can become unconscious and may need emergency treatment in hospital.

Do not use diphenhydramine cream at the same time as other products containing diphenhydramine. This can lead to overdose.

Urgent advice:Contact 111 for advice if:
you take more than your prescribed dose of diphenhydramine
Go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111

Information:
If you need to go to A&E, do not drive. Ask someone to drive you or call 999 and ask for an ambulance.

Bring the diphenhydramine packet or leaflet inside it, any remaining medicine, and any other medicines you take.

5. Side effects
Like all medicines, diphenhydramine can cause side effects, although not everyone gets them. However, you may be more likely to get them if you're over 65.

Common side effects
Common side effects happen in more than 1 in 100 people. Talk to your doctor or pharmacist if these side effects bother you or do not go away:

feeling sleepy, or drowsy, during the daytime
dry mouth
feeling dizzy or unsteady on your feet, or having difficulty concentrating
Diphenhydramine cream can sometimes make your rash worse. It may also make your skin sensitive to sunlight.

Serious side effects
Urgent advice:Call 111 now if:
you have a fast or irregular heartbeat (palpitations)
you feel any numbness or pins and needles
you feel confused or very restless
Immediate action required:Call 999 if:
you or child has had a seizure or fit
Information:
Do not drive yourself to A&E.

The person you speak to at 999 will give you advice about what to do.

Serious allergic reaction
In rare cases, it's possible to have a serious allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) to diphenhydramine.

Immediate action required:Call 999 now if:
your lips, mouth, throat or tongue suddenly become swollen
you're breathing very fast or struggling to breathe (you may become very wheezy or feel like you're choking or gasping for air)
your throat feels tight or you're struggling to swallow
your skin, tongue or lips turn blue, grey or pale (if you have black or brown skin, this may be easier to see on the palms of your hands or soles of your feet)
you suddenly become very confused, drowsy or dizzy
someone faints and cannot be woken up
a child is limp, floppy or not responding like they normally do (their head may fall to the side, backwards or forwards, or they may find it difficult to lift their head or focus on your face)
You or the person who's unwell may also have a rash that's swollen, raised, itchy, blistered or peeling.

These can be signs of a serious allergic reaction and may need immediate treatment in hospital.

Information:
Do not drive yourself to A&E.

The person you speak to at 999 will give you advice about what to do.

Other side effects
These are not all the side effects of diphenhydramine. For a full list, see the leaflet inside your medicine packet.

Information:
Reporting side effects
You can report any suspected side effect using the Yellow Card safety scheme.

Visit the Yellow Card website for more information about reporting side effects.

6. How to cope with side effects of diphenhydramine
What to do about:

feeling sleepy, or drowsy, during the daytime – drowsiness usually wears off 8 hours after a dose. Do not drive, ride a bike or use tools or machinery if you're feeling this way.
dry mouth – chew sugar-free gum or suck sugar-free sweets.
feeling dizzy or unsteady on your feet, or difficulty concentrating – if diphenhydramine makes you feel this way, stop what you're doing and sit or lie down until you feel better. If the feeling does not go away or is worrying you, do not take any more medicine and speak to a pharmacist or your doctor.
7. Pregnancy and breastfeeding
Diphenhydramine and pregnancy
While diphenhydramine can be used during pregnancy, it is not normally recommended. This is because of the side effects, which may be more significant during pregnancy. Discuss with your doctor or pharmacist other medicines, such as chlorphenamine, that may more suitable.

If you have difficulty sleeping while you're pregnant, your doctor or midwife may suggest ways to improve your sleep routine, like relaxing, and avoiding naps.

If you have a cough or cold, you can help to ease your symptoms by resting, drinking plenty of fluids and taking paracetamol.

Diphenhydramine and breastfeeding
If your doctor or health visitor says your baby is healthy, you can take diphenhydramine while you're breastfeeding, but it's better to take occasional doses or only take it for a short time.

Diphenhydramine passes into breast milk in very small amounts. Although it's unlikely to cause any side effects in your baby, it is a drowsy antihistamine, so could make your baby sleepy.

If you're breastfeeding, or planning to breastfeed, talk to your doctor. They may recommend similar antihistamines, called loratadine and cetirizine, that are more suitable while you're breastfeeding.

Talk to your doctor, pharmacist, midwife or health visitor if your baby is not feeding as well as usual, seems unusually sleepy, seems irritable, or if you have any other concerns about your baby.

Non-urgent advice:Tell your doctor if you're:
trying to get pregnant
pregnant
breastfeeding
8. Cautions with other medicines
Some medicines can affect the way diphenhydramine works, and increase the chances of you having side effects. Check with your pharmacist or doctor if you're taking:

antidepressants, such as venlafaxine or a monoamine oxidase inhibitor such as phenelzine
metoprolol, a heart medicine
any medicine that makes you drowsy, gives you a dry mouth, or makes it difficult for you to pee – taking diphenhydramine might make these side effects worse
If you're taking a cough or cold remedy or a painkiller containing diphenhydramine, check carefully what the other ingredients are. For example, check whether it contains paracetamol. Ask your pharmacist for advice before you take this medicine together with any other painkillers or medicines.

Mixing diphenhydramine with herbal remedies and supplements
There might be a problem taking some herbal remedies and supplements alongside diphenhydramine, especially ones that cause side effects such as sleepiness, a dry mouth or making it difficult to pee.



About dipyridamole
-Brand name: Attia
Dipyridamole is an antiplatelet medicine. It prevents a type of blood cell (platelets) sticking together and forming a dangerous blood clot.

Dipyridamole helps to prevent blood clots if you have an increased risk of having them. Your risk is higher if you've had:

a stroke or "mini-stroke" (transient ischaemic attack or TIA)
an operation on your heart to replace your heart valve
Dipyridamole is only available on prescription.

It comes as tablets and slow-release capsules (also called modified release). It's also available as a liquid if you find it difficult to swallow tablets or capsules.

Your doctor may prescribe dipyridamole alone or with daily low-dose aspirin.

Key facts
You'll usually take dipyridamole 2 to 4 times a day, depending on which type you're taking.
The most common side effects of dipyridamole include feeling or being sick, feeling dizzy and diarrhoea.
Do not drink too much alcohol while taking dipyridamole as this can make you feel dizzy or lightheaded.
If dipyridamole makes you feel dizzy, do not drive, cycle or use tools or machinery until you feel better.
If you're due to have surgery, let the doctors know that you take dipyridamole. They might ask you to stop taking it before surgery.

About docusate
-Brand names: Dulcoease, Dioctyl, Docusol, Norgalax
Docusate is a type of medicine called a laxative. It helps to soften your poo and makes it easier for you to go to the toilet if you have problems pooing (constipation).

Docusate may help you if:

your poos are dry and it makes it difficult for you to poo
you have piles (haemorrhoids)
you have a tear in the lining of your intestine, near your anus (anal fissure)
you're going to have a stomach x-ray as it can help you empty your bowels beforehand
Docusate comes as capsules and as a liquid that you swallow. It also comes as an enema. This is a tube of liquid medicine that you squeeze into your anus (bottom).

Docusate is available on prescription and to buy from pharmacies.

Key facts
Docusate capsules and liquid take 1 to 3 days to work.
Side effects can include feeling sick (nausea), stomach cramps and diarrhoea.
Docusate enemas usually work within 20 minutes, so it's best to stay close to a toilet.
Do not use a docusate enema if you have piles (haemorrhoids) or a tear near your anus (anal fissure).
Only give docusate to a child under 12 years old if a doctor prescribes it or a pharmacist recommends it.
Do not take docusate for more than 5 days, unless it's prescribed by a doctor. Talk to a doctor if you still have constipation after 5 days.

About domperidone
-Brand name: Motilium
Domperidone is an anti-sickness medicine. It helps you to stop feeling or being sick (nausea or vomiting).

It works by causing the muscles at the top of your stomach to tighten and the muscles at the bottom of your stomach to relax. This makes you less likely to be sick (vomit).

Domperidone can also be used to treat stomach pain if you're having end of life care (palliative care).

It is sometimes used to increase milk supply. Your doctor may prescribe it if you're having trouble breastfeeding but only if other things have not worked.

Domperidone is available on prescription only. It comes as tablets or as a liquid that you swallow.

Key facts
You can take domperidone when you need it, up to 3 times a day.
Domperidone should start to work in about 30 to 60 minutes.
It works best if you take it before meals.
The most common side effect of domperidone is a dry mouth, but this is usually mild and goes away by itself.
Domperidone is usually only prescribed for a short time (up to 1 week).

About donepezil
-Brand names: Aricept, Aricept Evess
Donepezil is a medicine that helps with some types of dementia.

It does not cure dementia. However, it treats some of the symptoms of Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies.

It can also help with mixed dementia. This is when you have more than one type of dementia.

Donepezil is available on prescription only.

It comes as tablets, including tablets that melt in your mouth, and as a liquid that you swallow.

Key facts
Donepezil is not a cure for dementia but it can help with symptoms like being forgetful or confused.
It usually takes at least a month for donepezil to start working, but it can take longer for some people.
The most common side effects of donepezil are diarrhoea, headaches and feeling sick (nausea).
You can take it with or without food.
Drinking alcohol stops donepezil from working as well as it should. It also increases the risk of side effects.



About dosulepin
Dosulepin is an antidepressant medicine that is used to treat depression.

Occasionally, dosulepin is also used for some types of nerve pain, such as fibromyalgia, and to prevent migraines.

Dosulepin is available on prescription, but usually only if you're already taking it and have not had any serious side effects.

It comes as capsules and tablets.

Key facts
Unless recommended by a specialist, dosulepin is no longer prescribed to new patients. This is because of concerns about side effects.
For depression, it usually takes 4 to 6 weeks to work fully. It usually takes 2 to 6 weeks to work fully if you're taking it for pain or migraine.
Common side effects of dosulepin include constipation, feeling dizzy, a dry mouth, feeling sleepy, difficulty peeing or headaches.
If dosulepin makes you feel sleepy, do not drive, cycle or use machinery until you feel better.
Dosulepin can cause withdrawal symptoms if you stop taking it suddenly. Talk to your doctor if you're thinking of stopping.

About doxazosin
Doxazosin belongs to a group of medicines called alpha blockers.

It's used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension) and symptoms of an enlarged prostate (benign prostatic enlargement).

Alpha blockers reduce blood pressure by relaxing your blood vessels so blood can pass through them more easily.

Doxazosin helps to reduce the symptoms of an enlarged prostate gland by relaxing the muscle around the bladder and prostate gland so you can pee more easily.

This medicine is only available on prescription and comes as tablets.

Key facts
You usually take doxazosin once a day. You can take it in the morning or evening, but it's best to take it at the same time every day.
The main side effects of doxazosin are headaches, swollen feet, ankles or fingers, needing to pee suddenly or more often, or pain in your lower stomach (abdomen).
Doxazosin can make you feel dizzy, or like you or everything around you is spinning (vertigo). If you feel dizzy, do not drive a car, ride a bike or use tools or machinery until you feel OK again.
If you are due to have surgery, talk to the nurse or doctor at your pre-assessment appointment. They will tell you if you need to stop taking it before your operation.
If you are taking medicines for erectile dysfunction, tell your doctor. Taking them with doxazosin may make you feel dizzy or light-headed.

About doxycycline
Doxycycline is an antibiotic that's used to treat infections including:

chest and dental infections
skin infections and conditions like rosacea
sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
other rare infections
It can also be used to prevent malaria if you're travelling abroad.

Doxycycline is available on prescription. It comes as capsules, tablets and tablets which dissolve in water (dispersible).

Key facts
For most infections, you'll start to feel better in a few days, but it's important to finish the course of medicine.
Doxycycline works more slowly to treat the condition rosacea. A doctor can review it after about 4 weeks to check how well it's working.
The most common side effects of doxycycline are headaches, feeling sick or being sick. It can also make your skin sensitive to the sun.
It's best not to drink alcohol while taking doxycycline because it can stop it working properly.
Doxycycline can sometimes cause thrush. If this happens, ask your doctor or pharmacist for advice.


About duloxetine
Duloxetine is a type of antidepressant medicine known as a serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor (SNRI). SNRIs are thought to work by increasing the amount of mood-enhancing chemicals, serotonin and noradrenaline, in your brain.

It's used to treat depression and anxiety.

It's also used to treat nerve pain, such as fibromyalgia, and can be used to treat stress urinary incontinence in women.

Duloxetine comes as capsules. It is only available on prescription.

Key facts
Duloxetine usually takes 2 to 4 weeks to work. It may take longer if you're taking it for nerve pain.
Common side effects include feeling sick, a dry mouth, headache, constipation and feeling sleepy. These side effects are usually mild and go away after a couple of weeks.
If you and your doctor decide to take you off duloxetine, your doctor may recommend reducing your dose gradually to help prevent withdrawal symptoms.
You may find you cannot concentrate properly while taking duloxetine. When you first start taking it, it's a good idea to stop driving and cycling, and avoid using machinery or tools, for the first few days until you know how this medicine makes you feel.









About edoxaban
Edoxaban is a type of medicine known as an anticoagulant.

It makes your blood flow through your veins more easily. This means your blood will be less likely to make a dangerous blood clot.

It's used to treat people who have had a health problem caused by a blood clot such as:

a stroke
a heart attack
a blood clot in the leg (deep vein thrombosis, or DVT)
a blood clot in the lungs (pulmonary embolism)
It's also used to prevent blood clots if you're at high risk of having them in the future. People who are at high risk include those who have an irregular heartbeat, known as atrial fibrillation.

Edoxaban is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets.

Key facts
You'll usually take edoxaban once a day.
You can take edoxaban with or without food.
The most common side effect is bleeding more easily than normal, such as having nosebleeds, heavier periods, bleeding gums and bruising.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you an anticoagulant alert card. Always carry this card with you. Show it to your doctor or dentist before you have surgery or dental treatment. It's important they know you're taking edoxaban, as it may put you at risk of bleeding.
You can drink alcohol while taking edoxaban. But heavy drinking, especially binge drinking, can make you more likely to bleed.


About empagliflozin
-Brand name: Jardiance
Empagliflozin is a medicine that's mainly used to treat type 2 diabetes.

Type 2 diabetes is a condition where the body does not make enough insulin, or the insulin that it makes does not work properly. This can cause high blood sugar levels (hyperglycaemia). Empagliflozin works by helping your body to remove extra sugar through your pee.

Your doctor may recommend empagliflozin for treating type 2 diabetes if:

diet and exercise are not enough to control your blood sugar levels
you cannot take metformin (another type of diabetes medicine)
It can also be taken together with other diabetes medicines, such as insulin, if a single diabetes medicine is not controlling your blood sugar properly.

Empagliflozin can also be used to treat:

heart failure – it can reduce the risk of your heart getting weaker, and help symptoms such as tiredness
chronic kidney disease (CKD) – it can help slow the rate at which the condition gets worse
Empagliflozin is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets.

It also comes combined with other diabetes medicines. Brand names include Synjardy (empagliflozin with metformin) and Glyxambi (empagliflozin with linagliptin).

Key facts
You'll usually take empagliflozin once a day.
Empagliflozin starts to work after about 1 to 2 hours to reduce your blood sugar levels, but it may take up to a week for it to work fully.
If you're taking empagliflozin with other diabetes medicines, it can sometimes cause low blood sugar (hypoglycaemia). It's a good idea to carry some sweets or fruit juice with you in case this happens.
Unlike some diabetes medicines, empagliflozin does not make you put on weight. In fact, some people find they lose weight.
If you have diabetes, you're entitled to free prescriptions for all your medicines, not just your diabetes ones.


About enalapril
Enalapril is a medicine used to reduce high blood pressure and to prevent or treat heart failure.

If you have high blood pressure, taking enalapril will help prevent a future heart attack or stroke.

Enalapril lowers your blood pressure and makes it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body.

This medicine is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets.

Enalapril is also available combined with another blood pressure medicine called hydrocholorothiazide (Innozide).

Key facts
Enalapril starts to reduce your high blood pressure within a few hours, but it may take a few weeks to fully take effect. If you're taking enalapril for heart failure, it may take weeks, even months, before you feel better.
Your first dose of enalapril may make you feel dizzy, so it's best to take it at bedtime. After the first dose, if you do not feel dizzy, you can take enalapril at any time of day. Try to take it at the same time every day.
Some people get a dry, tickly cough with enalapril.
If you get severe diarrhoea or vomiting from a stomach bug or illness, tell your doctor. You may need to stop taking enalapril for a while until you feel better.
Drinking alcohol with enalapril can make you feel dizzy or light-headed.


About eplerenone
-Brand name: Inspra
Eplerenone is usually taken for heart failure.

It helps to keep your symptoms of heart failure under control and reduce the risk of your heart getting weaker by:

reducing your blood pressure
controlling the amount of salt and water in your body
improving your heart function
It works by blocking the action of a hormone called aldosterone.

Eplerenone comes as tablets and is only available on prescription.

Key facts
You'll usually take eplerenone once a day, but your doctor may tell you to take it every other day if you get side effects or have any problems with your kidneys.
Side effects include feeling dizzy, headaches, not being able to sleep, and a cough.
Taking eplerenone can raise the levels of potassium in your blood. This can cause muscle cramps and diarrhoea. You'll have regular blood tests while you're taking it.
It's important to keep taking eplerenone even if you feel well. You'll still get the benefits of the medicine.
If you're on or want to start a low-salt diet, talk to your doctor. Some salt substitutes may increase your potassium levels.


About escitalopram
Escitalopram is a type of antidepressant known as a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI).

It's often used to treat depression and is sometimes used for anxiety, obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) or panic attacks.

Escitalopram helps many people recover from depression and has fewer side effects than older antidepressants.

Escitalopram is available on prescription. It comes as tablets and liquid drops that you put in a drink.

Key facts
Escitalopram is thought to work by increasing the levels of a mood-enhancing chemical called serotonin in your brain.
It usually takes 4 to 6 weeks for escitalopram to work fully.
Common side effects include feeling sick (nausea) and headaches. They're usually mild and go away after a couple of weeks.
If you and your doctor decide to take you off escitalopram, your doctor will probably recommend reducing your dose gradually to help prevent withdrawal side effects.
Some people find they cannot concentrate properly while they're taking escitalopram. It might be best to stop driving and cycling for the first few days of treatment until you know how this medicine makes you feel.

About erythromycin
Erythromycin is an antibiotic. It's widely used to treat chest infections, such as pneumonia, skin conditions, such as acne and rosacea, dental abscesses, and sexually transmitted infections.

In children, erythromycin is often used to treat ear infections or chest infections.

It’s available on prescription as tablets, capsules, a liquid you swallow or a skin solution to treat skin conditions like acne. It can also be given by injection, but this is usually only done in hospital.

Key facts
You’ll usually take erythromycin 2 or 4 times a day, or as prescribed by your doctor.
For most infections, you should feel better within a few days. For skin conditions like acne and rosacea, it may take a couple of months before you see an improvement.
The most common side effects of erythromycin are feeling or being sick, stomach cramps and diarrhoea.
Drinking alcohol with erythromycin may reduce its benefits or delay it working.
Do not eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice while you're taking erythromycin. It can increase the amount of erythromycin in your body and increase the chance of side effects.

About esomeprazole
Esomeprazole reduces the amount of acid your stomach makes.

It's widely used to:

treat indigestion, heartburn and acid reflux, and gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) – a condition which means you keep getting acid reflux
prevent stomach ulcers
Sometimes, esomeprazole is taken for a rare condition caused by a tumour in the pancreas or gut called Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.

Esomeprazole comes as capsules, tablets, and granules to make a liquid that you swallow.

Sometimes, it's mixed with naproxen, a medicine that reduces swelling (inflammation) and pain in joints and muscles. This is known by the brand name Vimovo.

All types of esomeprazole are available on prescription. You can also buy the lowest-strength, 20mg tablets and capsules, from pharmacies and supermarkets.

Key facts
Esomeprazole starts to work within 2 to 3 days, but it may take up to 4 weeks for it to work fully
Common side effects include headache, diarrhoea and stomach pain. These tend to be mild and go away when you stop taking the medicine.
Sometimes, esomeprazole can make you feel dizzy, sleepy, or cause blurred vision. Do not drive, cycle or use machinery or tools until you feel better if this happens.
If you buy esomeprazole without a prescription and your symptoms do not improve after 2 weeks, see a doctor before taking any more.
You can drink alcohol while taking esomeprazole but it can make your stomach produce more acid than normal. This can irritate your stomach lining and make your symptoms worse.

About ezetimibe
-Brand name: Ezetrol
Ezetimibe is a type of medicine used to lower cholesterol.

Cholesterol is a fatty substance in your blood that can block your blood vessels if levels become too high. This can make you more likely to have heart problems or a stroke.

Ezetimibe is used to treat high blood cholesterol.

You may also be prescribed ezetimibe if you cannot take cholesterol-lowering medicines called statins, or if a statin medicine does not work for you.

Ezetimibe is available on prescription only. It comes as tablets.

Ezetimibe also comes mixed with other medicines. When it's mixed with simvastatin, a type of statin, it's known by the brand name Inegy. When ezetimibe is mixed with bempedoic acid, it's called nustendi.

Ezetimibe helps stop your body taking in cholesterol from food.
It usually lowers cholesterol levels within 2 weeks.
You can take this medicine with or without food.
Common side effects include stomach (abdominal) pain and diarrhoea.
Treatment with ezetimibe is usually for life.

About felodipine
Felodipine is a calcium channel blocker used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension).

If you have high blood pressure, it helps to prevent future heart disease, heart attacks and strokes.

Felodipine is also used to prevent chest pain caused by heart disease (angina).

Felodipine lowers your blood pressure and makes it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body.

This medicine is only available on prescription. It comes as slow release tablets.

Key facts
You'll usually take felodipine once a day in the morning.
Felodipine starts to work on the day you start taking it. If you're taking it for high blood pressure you may not feel any different but the medicine is working and it's important to keep taking it. If you're taking it for angina it may take a couple of weeks for it to help your symptoms.
Felodipine can make some people feel dizzy. If this happens to you, do not drive a car, ride a bike, or use tools or machinery until you feel better.
Do not eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice while you're taking felodipine. Grapefruit can make side effects worse.

About fentanyl
Fentanyl is a strong opioid painkiller. It's used to treat severe pain, for example during or after an operation or a serious injury, or pain from cancer.

It's also used for other types of long-term pain when weaker painkillers have stopped working.

It works by blocking pain signals between the brain and the rest of the body. It also reduces the anxiety and stress caused by pain.

Fentanyl is only available on prescription. It comes as:

patches to put on your skin
lozenges and tablets that dissolve in your mouth
nasal spray
injections – usually only given in hospital
Fentanyl patches are used for long-lasting pain. Your doctor may also prescribe other types of fentanyl if you need extra pain relief while your regular painkiller wears off.

Key facts
The most common side effects of fentanyl are constipation, feeling sick and feeling sleepy.
It's possible to become addicted to fentanyl, but your doctor will explain how to reduce the risks of becoming addicted.
If you need to take fentanyl for more than a few weeks, your treatment plan may include details of how and when to stop taking this medicine.
Do not drive a car or ride a bike if fentanyl makes you sleepy, gives you blurred vision or makes you feel dizzy, clumsy or unable to concentrate or make decisions.
It's best not to drink alcohol when you first start taking or using fentanyl. You're more likely to get side effects such as feeling sleepy or drowsy.
Tell a doctor or nurse about your fentanyl if you're having any treatment or tests. Also, remind your pharmacist about your fentanyl when you collect prescriptions or buy other medicines.

About ferrous fumarate
-Brand names: Fersamal, Galfer
Ferrous fumarate is a type of iron that's used as a medicine to treat and prevent iron deficiency anaemia.

Iron helps the body to make healthy red blood cells which carry oxygen around the body. Some things such as blood loss, pregnancy or too little iron in your diet can make your iron supply drop too low, leading to anaemia.

Ferrous fumarate comes as tablets, capsules or as a liquid that you swallow.

It's available on prescription and to buy from pharmacies.

Key facts
Ferrous fumarate works best when taken on an empty stomach, at least an hour before eating, and 2 hours after eating.
Most people feel better after taking ferrous fumarate for 1 week, but it may take up to 4 weeks to work fully.
You may need to leave a gap between taking ferrous fumarate and your regular medicines – check with your doctor or pharmacist.
Common side effects include feeling or being sick, dark poo and diarrhoea.
Leave a 2 hour gap before having tea or coffee, dairy products, eggs or soybean products. This is because they can stop your body absorbing iron.
Your doctor or pharmacist may recommend taking ferrous fumarate with orange juice or a vitamin C supplement, to help your body absorb the iron.


About ferrous sulfate
-Brand name: Ironorm Drops
Ferrous sulfate (or sulphate) is a type of iron that's used as a medicine to treat and prevent iron deficiency anaemia.

Iron helps the body to make healthy red blood cells, which carry oxygen around the body. Some things such as blood loss, pregnancy or too little iron in your diet can make your iron supply drop too low, leading to anaemia.

Ferrous sulfate comes as tablets, or as drops that you swallow.

It is available on prescription and to buy from pharmacies.

Key facts
Ferrous sulfate works best when you take it on an empty stomach. If you can, take it 30 minutes before eating, or 2 hours after eating. But if it upsets your stomach, you can take it with or after food.
Most people begin to feel better after taking ferrous sulfate for 3 to 4 weeks, but it may take up to 2 to 4 months to work fully.
Common side effects include feeling or being sick, constipation and diarrhoea.
You may need to leave a gap between taking ferrous sulfate and your other medicines. Check with your doctor or pharmacist.
Leave a 2 hour gap before having tea or coffee, dairy products or eggs. This is because they can stop your body absorbing iron.
Your doctor or pharmacist may recommend taking ferrous sulfate with orange juice or a vitamin C supplement, to help your body absorb the iron.

. About fexofenadine
Fexofenadine is an antihistamine medicine that helps with the symptoms of allergies.

It's used to treat:

hay fever
conjunctivitis (red, itchy eye)
eczema
hives (urticaria)
reactions to insect bites and stings
some food allergies
Fexofenadine is known as a non-drowsy antihistamine. It's less likely to make you feel sleepy than some other antihistamines.

Fexofenadine comes as tablets.

It is available on prescription but you can also buy 120mg tablets from pharmacies and supermarkets. You can buy 180mg tablets for treating hives from pharmacies, or get them on prescription. Fexofenadine 30mg tablets for children are available on prescription only.

2. Key facts
You'll usually take fexofenadine once a day. Children aged 12 and under take it twice a day.
Fexofenadine is classed as a non-drowsy antihistamine, but some people still find it makes them feel quite sleepy.
Common side effects include headaches, feeling sleepy, dry mouth, feeling sick and dizziness.
Do not drink grapefruit juice, apple juice or orange juice while you're taking fexofenadine. It might make you more likely to get side effects.
It's best not to drink alcohol while you're taking fexofenadine as it can make you feel sleepy.


About finasteride
-Brand names: Proscar, Propecia
Finasteride is used to treat an enlarged prostate (benign prostate enlargement). It can help ease your symptoms if:

it's difficult to start peeing
you need to pee urgently or more often
it's difficult to empty your bladder completely
Finasteride is available on prescription only. It comes as tablets.

It can also be used to treat hair loss in men (male pattern baldness).

However, for hair loss you can only get finasteride on a private prescription. This means you'll need to pay the full cost of the medicine. It's not available on the NHS.

This medicine is generally not recommended for women. It might be prescribed by a specialist doctor but only in very rare cases.

Key facts
You'll usually take finasteride tablets once a day.
If you're taking finasteride it for an enlarged prostate it can take up to 6 months for it to work fully.
The main side effects are losing interest in sex and difficulty getting an erection.
Rare side effects include mood changes such as depression and thoughts of harming yourself. Speak to your doctor if you get these side effects.
Finasteride can affect the results of PSA testing (a blood test to check for prostate cancer). If you need to have a PSA test, tell your doctor that you're taking finasteride.

. About flucloxacillin
Flucloxacillin is an antibiotic.

It's used to treat:

skin and wound infections
bone infections (osteomyelitis)
ear infections in children
Flucloxacillin is only available on prescription.

It comes as capsules or as a liquid that you swallow. It can also be given by injection, but this is usually done in hospital.

2. Key facts
Take flucloxacillin on an empty stomach. This means at least 30 to 60 minutes before a meal or snack, and at least 2 hours after.
For most infections, you should start to feel better within a few days.
The most common side effects are feeling sick (nausea) and diarrhoea.
You can drink alcohol while taking flucloxacillin.
You can take flucloxacillin during pregnancy or while you're breastfeeding.

About fluconazole
-Brand names: Azocan, Diflucan, Canesten Thrush Oral Capsules
Fluconazole is an antifungal medicine. It's used to treat infections caused by different kinds of fungus. It can also be used to stop you getting a candida infection. It works by killing the fungus (or yeast) that's causing the infection.

The most common cause of fungal infections is a yeast called candida.

Fluconazole is used to treat many infections caused by candida including:

thrush in men and women, such as vaginal thrush, skin irritation or inflammation on the head of the penis (balanitis), and thrush in the mouth (oral thrush)
infections in your blood or elsewhere in your body
It's also used to treat a brain infection called cryptococcal meningitis. This is caused by a fungus called cryptococcus.

Fluconazole can also be used to prevent a fungal infection developing. It's only prescribed if you're likely to get this sort of infection. This includes people who:

keep getting vaginal thrush
have a weakened immune system
have had a bone marrow transplant
have HIV
are at risk of getting cryptococcal meningitis
Fluconazole comes as capsules or a liquid that you swallow. It also comes as an injection, but this is usually given in hospital.

Fluconazole is available on prescription. You can also buy it from a pharmacy for vaginal thrush or balanitis (brand names include Azocan and Canesten Thrush Oral Capsules).

For thrush, you can also buy fluconazole capsules with clotrimazole cream from pharmacies (brand names include Canesten Thrush Duo).

Key facts
You'll usually take fluconazole once a day.
Your dose and how long you take it for depends on the kind of infection you have.
If you have vaginal thrush, balanitis or oral thrush your symptoms should be better within 7 days. If you have a serious fungal infection, fluconazole can take 1 to 2 weeks to work fully.
The most common side effects of fluconazole are feeling sick (nausea) and diarrhoea.
It's important to finish your course of fluconazole to prevent the infection coming back.

About fluoxetine
Fluoxetine is a type of antidepressant known as a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI). It's often used to treat depression, and sometimes obsessive compulsive disorder and bulimia.

It works by increasing the levels of serotonin in the brain. Serotonin is thought to have a good influence on mood, emotion and sleep.

Fluoxetine helps many people recover from depression, and it has fewer side effects than some other antidepressants.

Fluoxetine is available only on prescription. It comes as tablets, capsules, or a liquid that you swallow.

Key facts
Fluoxetine usually takes around 4 to 6 weeks to work.
Common side effects include feeling sick, headaches and trouble sleeping. These side effects are usually mild and go away after a couple of weeks.
If you and your doctor decide you should stop taking fluoxetine, your doctor may recommend reducing your dose gradually. This helps to prevent withdrawal side effects.
Some people cannot concentrate properly while taking fluoxetine. It might be best to stop driving, cycling or using machinery for the first few days of treatment until you know how this medicine makes you feel.
Fluoxetine will not change your personality, it will simply help you feel like yourself again.

About inhaled fluticasone
-Brand name: Flixotide
Inhaled fluticasone is a medicine used for asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

You can take it using an inhaler (sometimes called a "puffer") which is available as an Evohaler or an Accuhaler. It's usually brown, orange or beige. This is called a preventer inhaler because it helps to prevent you from getting symptoms.

If you have severe asthma or COPD, you may need to use a nebuliser. A nebuliser is a machine that helps you breathe in your medicine as a mist, using a mask or a mouthpiece. You can use a nebuliser in hospital, or you may be given one to manage your condition at home. Fluticasone nebuliser liquid comes in individual doses called nebules.

Fluticasone inhalers and nebules are available on prescription.

Some inhalers contain fluticasone mixed with other medicines that help your breathing. Brand names include Flutiform, Relvar, Seretide and Trelegy.

Fluticasone is a type of medicine known as a steroid (also called a corticosteroid). This is not the same as an anabolic steroid.

It also comes as:

a skin cream, for skin conditions such as eczema
a nasal spray or nasal drops, for hay fever and cold-like symptoms caused by common allergies (allergic rhinitis), and nasal polyps
Key facts
You need to use your fluticasone inhaler every day for it to work, even if you do not have any symptoms.
It's important to rinse your mouth or brush your teeth after using a steroid preventer inhaler. This is to prevent infections and a sore mouth.
You may get a blue steroid treatment card if you need a high dose of fluticasone to control your symptoms. Show this card to your doctor or dentist before any treatment, so they know you're taking it. You may also need to carry a red steroid emergency card. Ask your pharmacist or doctor about both of these.
You'll usually be given another inhaler, called a reliever, to relieve your asthma symptoms when they happen.

About fluticasone nasal spray and drops
-Brand names: Flixonase, Avamys, Nasofan
Fluticasone nasal (nose) spray is a steroid medicine used to prevent and treat symptoms of allergic rhinitis and hay fever, including sneezing, itchy and runny nose, itchy and watery eyes, and a blocked nose. These are conditions caused by irritants in the air such as pollen, house dust mites and animal dander (tiny flecks of skin shed by animals).

It works by reducing the swelling and irritation inside the nose.

Flixonase, Avamys and Nasofan are prescription-only for adults and children. You can get some brands of fluticasone nasal spray, such as Pirinase, from pharmacies and shops but you must be 18 years old or over.

Fluticasone also comes as nasal drops that are used to shrink nasal polyps (painless soft growths inside the nose) to relieve the blocked nose. These are only available on prescription. Brand names include Flixonase.

Fluticasone is a type of medicine called a steroid (or corticosteroid). It's not the same as anabolic steroids.

Some nasal sprays, such as Dymista, contain fluticasone mixed with other medicines, such as antihistamines. These are used to treat allergic rhinitis.

Fluticasone also comes as an inhaler to treat asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and as a cream or ointment for skin conditions such as eczema and dermatitis.

Key facts
You need to use fluticasone regularly for it to work.
The most common side effects are an unpleasant taste or smell, nosebleeds and a dry or sore nose or throat.
Not all brands are suitable for children. It's important that your child only uses the spray prescribed for them.
If you're pregnant, speak to your doctor or a pharmacist before buying fluticasone nasal spray at a pharmacy or supermarket.
If your doctor has prescribed high doses of fluticasone to control your symptoms you may need to carry a steroid emergency card. Ask your pharmacist or doctor.

About fluticasone skin creams
-Brand name: Cutivate
Fluticasone is a type of medicine known as a steroid (also called a corticosteroid). This is not the same as an anabolic steroid.

Fluticasone skin creams are stronger than other steroid skin creams such as hydrocortisone.

Fluticasone cream has more fluticasone in it than the ointment. Although they are different strengths, both work well for treating skin conditions such as contact dermatitis, eczema and psoriasis.

Fluticasone skin creams are available on prescription only.

Fluticasone also comes as an inhaler and nebuliser to treat asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and a nasal (nose) spray or drops to treat hay fever and allergies.

Key facts
You're unlikely to have side effects from fluticasone skin cream or ointment, if you follow the instructions.
Creams are better for skin that is moist or weepy. Ointments are thicker and greasier and better for dry or flaky skin.
Only use fluticasone on your face if your doctor says it's OK.
Do not give fluticasone to children under the age of 3 months.
Fluticasone will not help with skin conditions such as acne and rosacea.
If you use fluticasone for a long time your doctor might advise you to reduce your dose gradually to avoid withdrawal reactions.

About folic acid
Folic acid is the synthetic version of the vitamin folate, also known as vitamin B9.

Folate helps the body make healthy red blood cells and is found in certain foods.

Folic acid is used to:

treat or prevent folate deficiency anaemia
help your baby's brain, skull and spinal cord develop properly in pregnancy, to avoid development problems (called neural tube defects) such as spina bifida
help reduce side effects from methotrexate, a medicine used to treat severe arthritis, Crohn's disease or psoriasis
Folic acid is available on prescription. It comes as tablets or as a liquid you swallow.

You can also buy lower dose tablets from pharmacies and supermarkets.

Folic acid can also be combined with:

ferrous fumarate and ferrous sulphate, to treat iron deficiency anaemia
other vitamins and minerals, as a multivitamin and mineral supplement
Key facts
You'll usually take folic acid once a day, but sometimes you'll only need to take it once a week. Your doctor will explain how often to take it.
Most adults and children can take folic acid.
If you're pregnant or trying to get pregnant, it's recommended you take folic acid until you're 12 weeks pregnant. It helps your baby grow normally.
You're unlikely to get side effects with folic acid, but some people feel sick, lose their appetite, get wind or feel bloated. These side effects are usually mild and do not last long.
It's best not to drink alcohol while taking folic acid, as it can stop your folic acid from working as well.

About furosemide
Furosemide is a type of medicine called a diuretic. It's used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension), heart failure and a build up of fluid in the body (oedema).

It's also sometimes used to help you pee when your kidneys are not working properly.

Diuretics are sometimes called "water tablets" because they make you pee more. This helps get rid of extra fluid in your body.

Furosemide is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets and a liquid that you swallow. It can also be given by injection, but this is usually only done in hospital.

Furosemide sometimes comes mixed with other diuretics, including with:

amiloride (called co-amilofruse, Frumil or Frumil LS)
spironolactone (called Lasilactone)
triamterene (called Frusene)
Key facts
You will usually take furosemide once a day in the morning. Some people take it twice a day, once in the morning and again at lunchtime.
Furosemide starts to work within 1 hour. Most people need to pee about 30 minutes after taking furosemide, and again within a few hours.
It can take furosemide a few weeks to take full effect and start helping with your high blood pressure or oedema.
Furosemide does not usually upset your stomach. You can take it with or without food.
The main side effect of furosemide is peeing more often than normal. Do not take furosemide after 4pm or you may have to wake in the night to go to the toilet.


About fusidic acid
Fusidic acid is also sometimes known as sodium fusidate.

Fusidic acid is an antibiotic. It works by stopping bacteria from growing.

It's used to treat bacterial infections, such as skin infections including cellulitis and impetigo, and eye infections including conjunctivitis (red, itchy eyes).

Fusidic acid is only available on prescription. It comes as a cream, ointment, or eye drops. It's also available with a steroid as a combined cream.

It's also given by injection, as a liquid you swallow, or as tablets, but these are usually only used in hospital.

Key facts
You'll usually use fusidic acid eye drops twice a day, or fusidic acid cream or ointment 3 or 4 times a day.
The most common side effects of fusidic acid eye drops are dry, sore, itchy or stinging eyes. You may also get blurred vision. It's unusual to get side effects with fusidic acid cream or ointment, but some people get skin irritation.
Treatment with fusidic cream or ointment is usually for 1 or 2 weeks, although sometimes it can be used for longer.
Use fusidic acid eye drops for at least 48 hours after you feel better and your eye looks normal.
It's important to finish your full course of treatment, to stop the infection coming back.


About Fybogel (ispaghula husk)
Ispaghula husk is a laxative taken to treat constipation (difficulty pooing). It's usually known by the brand name Fybogel. Other brand names include Ispagel.

It works by bulking poo up with fluid so that it's softer.

It comes as plain or fruit-flavoured granules that you mix with water to make a high-fibre drink.

Fybogel is available on prescription and to buy from pharmacies and supermarkets.

Key facts
Fybogel is a high-fibre drink that you take in the morning and evening, preferably after a meal.
It usually takes 2 or 3 days to work.
When taking this type of laxative, it's important to drink plenty of fluids.
The main side effects are wind and bloating.
It's possible to have a mild allergic reaction to Fybogel such as itchy eyes, nose or skin.

About gabapentin
-Brand name: Neurontin
Gabapentin is used to treat epilepsy.

It's also taken for nerve pain, which can be caused by different conditions, including diabetes and shingles. Nerve pain can also happen after an injury.

In epilepsy, it's thought that gabapentin stops seizures by reducing the abnormal electrical activity in the brain.

With nerve pain, it's thought to block pain by affecting the pain messages travelling through the brain and down the spine.

Gabapentin is available on prescription. It comes as tablets, capsules and a liquid that you swallow.

Key facts
You'll usually take gabapentin 3 times a day. You can take it with or without food.
Most people who take gabapentin do not get any side effects. But some people may feel sleepy, tired and dizzy. Common side effects are usually mild and go away by themselves.
It takes at least a few weeks for gabapentin to work.
Most people do not have to stay on the same brand of gabapentin as there's very little difference between brands.
Some people can become addicted to gabapentin. When stopping gabapentin you'll need to reduce your dose gradually to avoid withdrawal symptoms.
If you have epilepsy, you are entitled to free prescriptions for all the medicines you take, not just your epilepsy ones. You can get an application form from your doctor's surgery.

1. About Gaviscon
Gaviscon can be used to treat heartburn (acid reflux) and indigestion.

The medicine works by forming a protective layer that floats on top of the contents of your stomach. This stops stomach acid escaping up into your food pipe. Gaviscon also contains an antacid that neutralises excess stomach acid and reduces pain and discomfort.

Gaviscon comes as chewable tablets, or a liquid that you drink (in bottles or in sachets). It also comes as a powder for babies and children under 2 years old.

You can buy Gaviscon from pharmacies and supermarkets. Some kinds of Gaviscon are available on prescription.

2. Key facts
You'll usually take Gaviscon after meals and at bedtime.
You should feel the benefit of taking Gaviscon soon after taking it, and it will last for around 4 hours.
It's safe to take paracetamol at the same time as Gaviscon but do not take ibuprofen or aspirin with it.
If you've bought Gaviscon without a prescription, do not take it for longer than 7 days without checking with a doctor.
There are different types of Gaviscon. Ask your doctor or pharmacist which one is best for you.


About gliclazide
Gliclazide is used to treat type 2 diabetes.

It's a medicine known as a sulfonylurea. Sulfonylureas increase the amount of insulin your pancreas makes. This lowers your blood sugar.

Type 2 diabetes is a condition where the body does not make enough insulin, or makes insulin that does not work properly. This causes high blood sugar (hyperglycaemia).

Gliclazide is available on prescription. It comes as standard and slow-release tablets.

Key facts
Gliclazide can sometimes make your blood sugar level too low (hypoglycaemia). This can affect your concentration. If this happens, do not drive, cycle or use machines or tools until you feel better. Carry some sweets or fruit juice with you to help when this happens.
Some people find that they put on weight when they take gliclazide. Try to eat a healthy, balanced diet to help with this.
You may not have had any symptoms of diabetes, so you may not feel any different when you take gliclazide. This does not mean that gliclazide is not working. It's important to keep taking it.
If you're going to have an operation, tell the doctor you're taking gliclazide. This is because it increases your risk of low blood sugar during the operation.
If you have diabetes, you can get free prescriptions for all your medicines, not just the diabetes ones. You will need to have a medical exemption certificate.


About glimepiride
Glimepiride is a medicine used to treat type 2 diabetes.

Type 2 diabetes is a condition where the body does not make enough insulin, or the insulin that it makes does not work properly. This can cause high blood sugar levels (hyperglycaemia).

Glimepiride lowers your blood sugar by increasing the amount of insulin your body produces.

Glimepiride is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets.

Key facts
You'll usually take glimepiride once a day in the morning.
Glimepiride reduces blood sugar levels in 2 to 3 hours. You may not feel any different if you do not have symptoms from diabetes, but it's important to keep taking it.
The most common side effects are feeling sick, indigestion and diarrhoea.
Glimepiride can sometimes give you low blood sugar (hypoglycaemia). Carry some sweets or fruit juice with you to help when this happens.
Some people find they put on weight with glimepiride. Eating a healthy, balanced diet and regular exercise can help with this.
If you have diabetes, you're entitled to free prescriptions for all of your medicines, not just your diabetes ones.

About glyceryl trinitrate (GTN)
-Brand names: Rectogesic, Minitran, Glytrin
Glyceryl trinitrate, or GTN, is a type of medicine called a nitrate. It's used to prevent and treat chest pain caused by angina.

It can help stop chest pain if an angina attack has already started. It can also help to prevent the chest pain starting.

It comes as tablets or as a spray that you put under your tongue. It also comes as patches that you put on your skin.

Sometimes GTN patches are used in hospital to make your veins easier to see if you need to have a drip (infusion).

GTN is also available as a rectal ointment used to treat tears in the skin around your bottom (anal fissures).

GTN rectal ointment is available on prescription. You can buy GTN tablets, spray and patches from a pharmacy.

Key facts
You use GTN skin patches every day to help prevent chest pain caused by angina from starting. You use the tablets or spray during an angina attack, or before any activity that's likely to cause an attack.
The most common side effects include headaches, feeling dizzy or facial flushing.
If GTN makes you feel dizzy, sleepy or faint, do not drive, ride a bike or use tools or machinery until you feel better.
It's best not to drink too much alcohol while taking GTN as this can make you feel dizzy, sleepy or faint.
If you're having surgery, let the doctors know that you use GTN. They might ask you to stop using it before surgery.

About haloperidol
-Brand names: Haldol, Serenace
Haloperidol is a medicine that helps with mental health conditions such as:

confusion and aggression at the end of life (palliative care)
feelings of agitation or anxiety
schizophrenia, where you may see, hear or feel things that are not there, believe things that are not true, feel unusually suspicious, or have muddled thoughts
the mania symptoms of bipolar disorder, where your mood changes from feeling highly excited (mania) to feeling very low (depression)
severe confusion and aggression in Alzheimer's disease and other types of dementia, if other treatments have not worked
It's also used as an anti-sickness medicine to treat:

feeling or being sick (nausea or vomiting) caused by general anaesthetics, used to put you to sleep for an operation
feeling or being sick at the end of life (palliative care)
It also treats some conditions that affect movement, such as severe Tourette's syndrome.

Haloperidol is an antipsychotic medicine that works by blocking certain types of nerve (neuron) activity in the brain. This can help with feelings of anxiety and other symptoms of mental health conditions. It also helps block activity in the area of the brain that controls feeling and being sick.

Haloperidol is only available on prescription.

It comes as tablets and as a liquid that you swallow. It can also be given as an injection but this is usually done in hospital.

Key facts
Haloperidol tablets and liquid start to work after 1 to 2 hours. If you're taking it for a long-term mental health condition, it may take several weeks to feel the full benefit.
Common side effects include feeling dizzy, constipation and a dry mouth. They're usually mild and go away by themselves.
If you start or stop smoking during treatment, tell your medical team, as your dose may need to be changed.
It's best not to drink alcohol while taking haloperidol. It can increase the chance of side effects, such as feeling sleepy and low blood pressure.
Do not drive, cycle or use machinery if you feel tired or dizzy after taking haloperidol.

About heparinoid
-Brand name: Hirudoid
Heparinoid is a medicine that helps to prevent small blood clots from forming and reduces the swelling of the veins just under your skin.

Heparinoid is used to treat:

bruises
internal bruising (haematoma)
inflamed veins near the surface of the skin caused by small blood clots – superficial thrombophlebitis
It comes as a cream or gel. The gel has an added cooling effect.

Heparinoid is available on prescription and to buy from pharmacies and shops.

Key facts
You can use heparinoid up to 4 times a day.
It's generally a very safe medicine and does not usually cause any side effects.
Some people may get a rash while using heparinoid cream or gel but this is rare.
Do not use heparinoid cream or gel on children younger than 5 years.
Heparinoid should work within a few days if you're using it to treat bruises. It may take longer for your symptoms to get better if you have more severe bruising (haematoma), or for superficial thrombophlebitis.


About hormone replacement therapy (HRT)
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) is a treatment used to help menopause symptoms. It replaces the hormones oestrogen and progesterone, which fall to low levels as you approach the menopause.

Menopause symptoms HRT can help to treat include:

hot flushes
night sweats
sleep problems
mood swings
anxiety and low mood
vaginal dryness
Menopause is when your periods stop due to lower hormone levels. It usually affects women between the ages of 45 and 55 but it can happen earlier. It affects anyone who has periods.

Oestrogen and progesterone are an essential part of period cycles, ovulation and pregnancy. They also keep your bones healthy. As you get older, the loss of these hormones can have a big effect on your body.

To replace these hormones, you'll usually take a combination of oestrogen and progestogen. If you've had a hysterectomy to remove your womb you can take oestrogen on its own.

Find out more about menopause

Who can take HRT
You can usually take HRT if you're having menopause symptoms.

But HRT may not be suitable if you:

have a history of breast cancer, ovarian cancer or womb cancer
have a history of blood clots – you may need to use patches or gels rather than tablets
have untreated high blood pressure – your blood pressure will need to be controlled before you can start HRT
have liver disease
are pregnant – it's still possible to get pregnant while taking HRT, so it's important to use contraception until 2 years after your last period if you're under 50, or for 1 year after the age of 50

1. About hydrocortisone
Hydrocortisone is a steroid (corticosteroid) medicine.

It works by calming down your body's immune response to reduce pain, itching and swelling (inflammation).

It can also be used as hormone replacement for people who do not have enough of the natural stress hormone, cortisol.

Hydrocortisone is used to treat many health problems. The medicine comes in different forms, including skin creams for the body and scalp, injections and tablets. The type of hydrocortisone you use will depend on your health problem.

2. Skin problems: hydrocortisone cream, ointment or lotion
If you're treating a skin problem with hydrocortisone, it will usually be with a cream, ointment or lotion. These can be used for skin problems like:

eczema and contact dermatitis (when the skin reacts to something it touches)
heat rash (prickly heat)
reactions to insect bites and stings
psoriasis
nappy rash
Find out more about hydrocortisone for skin.

3. Piles and itchy bottom: hydrocortisone cream, ointment, spray or suppositories
Hydrocortisone comes as creams, ointment, spray or suppositories, for use inside and around the anus (bottom) to treat:

piles (haemorrhoids)
an itchy bottom
Find out more about hydrocortisone treatments for piles and itchy bottom.

4. Mouth ulcers: hydrocortisone tablets that melt on the inside of your mouth
Buccal tablets stick gently to the inside of your mouth and release hydrocortisone as they dissolve. Buccal tablets relieve the pain of mouth ulcers.

Find out more about hydrocortisone buccal tablets.

5. Painful joints: hydrocortisone injections
Hydrocortisone injections are used to treat tennis elbow, painful tendons and bursitis. They help to reduce pain and swelling (inflammation).

Find out more about hydrocortisone injections.

6. Adrenal gland conditions: hydrocortisone tablets
You may take hydrocortisone tablets if your body does not make enough cortisol, for example if you have Addison's disease, or if you've had your adrenal glands taken out.

The tablets can also be prescribed for hypopituitarism, a rare condition affecting the pituitary gland.


About hydrocortisone buccal tablets
-Brand name: Corlan
Hydrocortisone is a type of medicine known as a steroid (also called a corticosteroid). Corticosteroids are not the same as anabolic steroids.

Hydrocortisone buccal tablets relieve the soreness of mouth ulcers and speed up healing.

The tablets stick gently to the inside of your mouth and release hydrocortisone as they dissolve.

Hydrocortisone buccal tablets are usually prescribed by your doctor or are available from pharmacies.

Important:Tablet shortage
Due to a supply issue, hydrocortisone buccal tablets are not currently available on prescription or to buy at pharmacies. If you've been prescribed these tablets, speak to your doctor about suitable alternatives.

Other types of hydrocortisone
There are different types of hydrocortisone, including tablets you swallow, skin treatments and injections.

Find out more about other ways you can use hydrocortisone to treat different health problems.

Key facts
Mouth ulcers will usually feel less sore within a few days of starting treatment and should heal within 5 days.
You put hydrocortisone buccal tablets directly on top of your mouth ulcer. You'll usually use 4 hydrocortisone buccal tablets a day for up to 5 days.
Leave the tablet to dissolve slowly against the ulcer. If you swallow or suck buccal tablets they will not work.
If you have more than 1 ulcer, move the tablet around your mouth so the medicine can dissolve on each ulcer. Do not use more than 1 tablet at a time and do not use more than 4 in a day.
Do not use buccal tablets for mouth ulcers which are caused by dentures (false teeth), an injury or an infection – they could make these ulcers worse.

About hydrocortisone for piles and itchy bottom
-Brand names: Anugesic-HC, Anusol HC, Proctosedyl, Uniroid, Xyloproct
Hydrocortisone is used in some medicines to treat:

piles (haemorrhoids) inside or around your bottom (anus)
itchy bottom
These treatments do not cure piles, but they can help with the pain and itching.

Hydrocortisone is a type of medicine known as a steroid (also called a corticosteroid). Corticosteroids are not the same as anabolic steroids.

Hydrocortisone treatments for piles and itchy bottom come as creams, ointments, sprays and suppositories. You can buy some smaller sizes from a pharmacy, but others are only available on prescription.

Some of these medicines also contain local anaesthetics and other medicines to soothe the symptoms.

Other types of hydrocortisone
There are other ways of taking or using hydrocortisone, including injections and tablets.

Find out about other ways you can use hydrocortisone for different health problems.

Key facts
Some hydrocortisone creams and ointments can only be used on the outside of your body. The best type of treatment for you depends on your symptoms.
You'll usually apply treatments several times a day – first thing in the morning, last thing at night and after you've done a poo.
The pain and itching should get better within a few days of starting treatment.
You're unlikely to have side effects from hydrocortisone, if you follow the instructions.
Do not use hydrocortisone treatments for longer than 7 days. The local anaesthetic in them can make your skin sensitive. Long-term use can also make your skin thinner.


About hydrocortisone for skin
-Brand names: Dermacort, Derma Care, HC45
Hydrocortisone skin treatments are used to treat swelling, itching and irritation. They can help with the symptoms of:

eczema
psoriasis
contact dermatitis
heat rash (prickly heat)
insect bites and stings
nappy rash
Hydrocortisone is a type of medicine known as a steroid (also called a corticosteroid). Corticosteroids are not the same as anabolic steroids.

Hydrocortisone skin treatments come as:

cream
ointment
lotion
Most hydrocortisone skin treatments are mild and available to buy from pharmacies. Creams for insect bites and stings are also available to buy from shops, for adults and children aged 10 years old and over.

Creams for nappy rash and other skin problems in children under 10 years old are only available on prescription.

The strength of the products ranges from 0.1% (1mg of hydrocortisone in each gram) to 2.5% (25mg of hydrocortisone in each gram). Pharmacies sell hydrocortisone skin treatments up to a maximum 1% strength.

There is a stronger hydrocortisone cream called hydrocortisone butyrate (brand name Locoid). This is only available on prescription.

Sometimes hydrocortisone is mixed with antimicrobials (chemicals that kill germs). This is used to treat skin problems caused by bacterial or fungal infections.

Other types of hydrocortisone
There are other ways of taking or using hydrocortisone, including tablets and injections.

Find out about other ways you can use hydrocortisone to treat different health problems.

Key facts
Most people need to use hydrocortisone skin treatments once or twice a day for 1 to 2 weeks. But if you buy it from a pharmacy or shop, do not use it for more than 1 week without talking to a doctor.
You're unlikely to have side effects from hydrocortisone skin treatments if you use them for less than 4 weeks.
Never put hydrocortisone on your face unless your doctor says it's OK and has given you a prescription for it. It can make some skin problems worse like impetigo, rosacea and acne.
Only use hydrocortisone skin treatments on children under 10 years old if a doctor recommends it.
Skin creams should not be used on the eyes, around the bottom or genitals, or on broken or infected skin.
If you use hydrocortisone for a long time your doctor might advise you to reduce your dose gradually to avoid withdrawal reactions.


About hydrocortisone injections
Hydrocortisone injections, also called corticosteroid injections, are used to treat swollen or painful joints, or muscle pain. You may get this type of pain after an injury.

They're also used to treat painful tendons and bursitis (when the fluid-filled sacs that cushion a joint become swollen).

Hydrocortisone injections usually help relieve pain and swelling to make movement easier. The benefits can last for 2 to 3 months.

Hydrocortisone is a type of medicine known as a steroid (or corticosteroid). Corticosteroids are not the same as anabolic steroids.

Hydrocortisone injections are only available on prescription. They're usually given by a specially trained doctor in a GP surgery or hospital clinic.

There are different types of hydrocortisone. These include:

skin creams
tablets
sprays, ointments and suppositories
Find out more about other ways you can use hydrocortisone for different health conditions.

Key facts
After a hydrocortisone injection, your pain may feel better for several months, sometimes up to a year.
Your pain and swelling may immediately feel worse after an injection. This pain usually goes away after a few days.
Hydrocortisone injections can affect your immune system, so you're more likely to get infections. Tell your doctor if you get an infection, such as COVID-19, or if you come into contact with chickenpox, shingles or measles as these infections could make you very ill.
If you or your child have been having hydrocortisone injections for a long time, you may need a red steroid emergency card (for adults) or an adrenal insufficiency card (for children). Ask your pharmacist or doctor if you do not have one.


Hydrocortisone rectal foam
Hydrocortisone rectal foams have been discontinued by the manufacturer.

For information about other prescription medicines for ulcerative colitis and similar bowel conditions, speak to your doctor or a pharmacist.

To treat piles (haemorrhoids), hydrocortisone also comes as cream, ointment and suppositories. If you are looking for information on this, you can read about hydrocortisone for piles and itchy bottom.

About hydrocortisone tablets
-Brand names: Plenadren, Efmody
Hydrocortisone tablets are a type of medicine known as a steroid (corticosteroid). Corticosteroids are not the same as anabolic steroids.

Hydrocortisone tablets work as a hormone replacement for a natural hormone called cortisol.

You may take hydrocortisone tablets if your body does not make enough cortisol – for example if you have Addison's disease or if you've had your adrenal glands taken out.

They can also be prescribed for hypopituitarism, a rare condition affecting the pituitary gland.

Hydrocortisone tablets come as standard tablets, slow-release tablets and soluble tablets. These are only available on prescription.

Other types of hydrocortisone
There are different types of hydrocortisone, including skin treatments and injections.

Find out more about other ways you can use hydrocortisone to treat different health problems.

Key facts
The most common side effects of hydrocortisone tablets are feeling dizzy, headaches, swollen ankles and feeling weak or tired.
Taking hydrocortisone tablets can mean you're more likely to get infections. Tell your doctor if you get an infection, such as COVID-19, or if you come into contact with anyone who has chickenpox, shingles or measles.
Tell anyone who is giving you medical or dental treatment that you're taking hydrocortisone tablets. You may need a higher dose of hydrocortisone for a while.
Hydrocortisone tablets can cause extra side effects if you stop taking them suddenly. Do not stop taking the medicine without talking to your doctor.
If you take hydrocortisone tablets for more than 3 weeks, or you're on a high dose, you'll get a blue steroid card. You may also need to carry a red steroid emergency card (for adults), or an adrenal insufficiency card (for children).
You will need to carry a steroid emergency card (for adults), or an adrenal insufficiency card (for children), if you take hydrocortisone tablets to treat Addison's disease, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, other adrenal conditions, adrenal insufficiency or hypothalamic or pituitary disorder. Do not stop taking these tablets if you're taking it for these conditions.



About hydroxocobalamin
-Brand names: Cobalin-H, Neo-Cytamen
Hydroxocobalamin is a manufactured version of the vitamin B12. It's used to treat and prevent vitamin B12 deficiency anaemia, where you have low levels of this vitamin in your body.

Your body requires vitamin B12 to make red blood cells. You can get it from your food or supplements, but sometimes there may not be enough vitamins in what you eat. This can happen if you are vegan or you do not eat much meat or dairy products.

The most common cause of vitamin B12 deficiency in the UK is pernicious anaemia (an autoimmune condition that affects your stomach).

Vitamin B12 deficiency can also be a side effect of metformin, a diabetes medicine, particularly if you take a high dose of metformin or if you take it for a long time.

Hydroxocobalamin is only available on prescription.

It is given as an injection. This will usually be at your GP surgery but you might sometimes have it in hospital.

Key facts
Hydroxocobalamin starts to work straight away. However, it may take a few days or weeks before your symptoms start to improve and you feel better.
At first, you may need to have the injection a few times a week to boost your levels of vitamin B12. Once your condition improves, you might only have it every few months.
Some common side effects are feeling or being sick and diarrhoea.
You may have some pain, swelling or itching where you had the injection. This is usually mild and does not last long.
It's safe to take for a long time. Some people need to take hydroxocobalamin for the rest of their lives.


About hydroxychloroquine
-Brand name: Quinoric
Hydroxychloroquine is a type of medicine called a disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drug (DMARD). It works by blocking the effects of the chemicals released when your immune system attacks your body.

It's used to treat inflammatory conditions, including rheumatoid arthritis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis (inflammation of joints in children) and lupus.

It's also used to treat some other skin conditions including sarcoidosis, photosensitive skin disorders (where your skin reacts to sunlight), lichen planus and urticarial vasculitis.

Hydroxychloroquine reduces swelling (inflammation), pain and stiffness of joints, and can improve or clear up some rashes.

It's sometimes used with another DMARD such as methotrexate or a short course of steroids to relieve pain.

Hydroxychloroquine is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets.

Key facts
For conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis, lupus and skin conditions, you'll usually take 1 or 2 hydroxychloroquine tablets every day.
It may take several weeks before you notice an improvement in your condition.
Side effects can include stomach pain, feeling or being sick and skin rashes.
Hydroxychloroquine can make you more likely to get infections. Try to avoid close contact with people who you know are unwell.
Hydroxychloroquine can affect your eyes. You will need to have your eyes examined every year if you have taken it for more than 5 years. These yearly eye examinations may start earlier if you're at increased risk of problems.
If you take hydroxychloroquine for a long time, you may need to have full blood counts (tests to check the types and numbers of cells in your blood) and muscle function tests.


About hyoscine hydrobromide
-Brand names: Kwells, Joy-Rides, Kwells Kids, Travel Calm, Scopoderm
Hyoscine hydrobromide is a travel sickness (motion sickness) medicine that belongs to a group of medicines called anticholinergics or antimuscarinics.

It's thought to work by affecting your inner ear and your brain to control vomiting. It also relaxes the muscles in the walls of your stomach.

Hyoscine hydrobromide comes as patches that you stick to your skin and tablets that you suck, chew or swallow.

It can also be given by injection, but this is usually only done in hospital. It is given to reduce the amount of saliva in your mouth which can help with symptoms if you're having palliative or end of life care.

You can buy the tablets and patches at pharmacies.

Information:
Hyoscine hydrobromide is not the same as hyoscine butylbromide, better known as Buscopan.

Key facts
Hyoscine hydrobromide tablets take 20 to 30 minutes to start working. The patches take up to 6 hours to work fully.
The most common side effects are a dry mouth, constipation and blurred vision.
Do not give hyoscine hydrobromide travel sickness tablets to children under the age of 3 years. Do not use the patches on children under the age of 10 years.
Do not drive a car or ride a bike if hyoscine hydrobromide makes you sleepy, gives you blurred vision, or makes you feel dizzy, clumsy or unable to concentrate.
It's best not to drink alcohol while taking hyoscine hydrobromide, as it may make you very sleepy.


About ibuprofen for adults
Ibuprofen is an everyday painkiller for a range of aches and pains, including back pain, period pain, toothache and symptoms of colds, flu or coronavirus (COVID-19). It also treats inflammation such as sprains and strains, and pain from arthritis.

It's available as tablets, capsules, granules and as a liquid that you swallow. It also comes as a gel, mousse and spray that you rub into your skin.

Ibuprofen is combined with other painkillers in some products. It's an ingredient in some cold and flu remedies, such as Nurofen Cold and Flu.

You can buy most types of ibuprofen from pharmacies and supermarkets. Some types are only available on prescription.

For under-17s, read our information on ibuprofen for children.

Key facts
Ibuprofen works by reducing hormones that cause pain and swelling in the body.
It takes 20 to 30 minutes to work if you take it by mouth, and 1 to 2 days to work if you put it on your skin.
Ibuprofen is typically used for period pain or toothache. Some people find ibuprofen better than paracetamol for back pain.
Always take ibuprofen tablets, capsules, granules and liquid with food or a drink of milk to reduce the chance of an upset stomach. Do not take it on an empty stomach.
If you're taking tablets, capsules, granules or liquid, take the lowest dose to control your pain for the shortest possible time. Do not take it for more than 10 days (or 3 days if you're under 18) unless you've spoken to your doctor. Do not use the gel, mousse or spray for more than 2 weeks without talking to your doctor.


About ibuprofen for children
-Brand names: Nurofen for Children, Calprofen, Brufen
Ibuprofen is a common painkiller for children. It's often used to treat symptoms of conditions such as colds, flu and coronavirus (COVID-19), teething, toothache, headaches, sore throat and pain from ear infections.

Ibuprofen also treats swelling (inflammation), such as aches and pains after an injury like a sprain, or because of a health condition like childhood (juvenile) arthritis.

You can also give ibuprofen to your child if they have a high temperature (fever) and they feel distressed or unwell.

For children aged 3 months to 12 years, ibuprofen comes as a liquid (oral suspension) or as chewable capsules.

For children aged 12 years or older, ibuprofen is available as tablets, capsules and granules that you dissolve in water to make a drink.

You can buy most types of ibuprofen from pharmacies and supermarkets. Some types, such as ibuprofen granules, are only available on prescription.

For 18 years and older, read our information on ibuprofen for adults.

Key facts
Ibuprofen comes in different strengths. The strength and dosage for your child depends on their age (and sometimes weight), so always read the instructions carefully.
Your child should start to feel better about 20 to 30 minutes after taking ibuprofen.
It's best to give ibuprofen with, or just after, a meal so it does not give them indigestion. Do not give it on an empty stomach.
Talk to a doctor if your child needs to take ibuprofen for more than 3 days (or 1 day if they're under 6 months) or their symptoms do not improve or they get worse.
Do not give ibuprofen to your child if they have asthma, unless their doctor has said it's OK.


About indapamide
Indapamide is a type of medicine called a diuretic.

Diuretics are sometimes called "water tablets" because they make you pee more. This helps get rid of extra fluid in your body.

Indapamide is used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension). It's also sometimes used to treat heart failure and the build up of fluid in your body (oedema).

Indapamide is only available on prescription.

It comes as standard tablets and slow release tablets, which release the medicine into your body gradually.

Indapamide sometimes comes mixed with perindopril to also treat high blood pressure.

Key facts
You'll usually take indapamide once a day, in the morning.
The most common side effect is a skin rash.
Indapamide is not usually recommended during pregnancy or if you're breastfeeding.
Indapamide can cause low levels of sodium (salt) in your body, so very strict low-salt diets are not recommended.
You can drink alcohol while taking indapamide but drinking too much can lower your blood pressure and make you feel dizzy or light-headed.



Insulin for type 1 diabetes
Insulin is a medicine that helps your body use glucose (sugar) for energy.

If you have type 1 diabetes, your body cannot produce insulin. You'll need to be prescribed insulin to stop your blood glucose from getting too high.

How you take insulin
You can inject insulin using an insulin pen. This is a device that helps you inject safely and take the right dose.

Some people use an insulin pump instead of a pen. This is a device you attach to your body that gives you small amounts of insulin throughout the day and night.

When you're first prescribed insulin you'll be shown how to use your pen or your pump.

Read about living with type 1 diabetes, including managing blood glucose and how to inject insulin.

Types of insulin for type 1 diabetes
Most people with type 1 diabetes take both:

a long-acting insulin (also called background or basal insulin) once or twice a day
a rapid-acting insulin (also called mealtime or bolus insulin) before meals
This combination is sometimes known as a basal bolus regimen.

You'll need to calculate your rapid-acting insulin dose for each meal, depending on the amount of carbohydrates you'll be eating (carb counting).

If you use an insulin pump, you'll only need rapid-acting insulin. Your pump will give you small doses throughout the day so you do not need to take a long-acting insulin.

Your diabetes care team will discuss your insulin treatment with you and recommend the treatment they think is best for you. The type of insulin you take and your dose may change over time.

Long-acting insulin
There are different types and brands of long-acting insulin.

Your diabetes care team will usually recommend taking insulin detemir (Levemir) twice a day.

They may recommend insulin glargine (Lantus, Toujeo, Semglee or Abasaglar) if you either:

cannot take insulin detemir
prefer to have fewer injections
Insulin glargine is usually taken once a day.

Your diabetes care team may recommend a type of insulin that lasts for longer, called insulin degludec (Tresiba), if you either:

get low blood glucose (hypoglycaemia, or hypos) at night
need help from a carer to take injections
Insulin degludec is taken once a day.

Information:
Find out more about long-acting insulin and how to take it

Rapid-acting insulin
There are different types and brands of rapid-acting insulin. Your diabetes care team will usually recommend either:

insulin aspart (NovoRapid, Fiasp or Trurapi)
insulin lispro (Humalog, Admelog or Lyumjev)
insulin glulisine (Apidra)
You'll usually need to take this around 15 minutes before each meal.

Some brands, such as Fiasp and Lyumjev, work more quickly so you can leave a shorter gap before eating.

Insulin for type 2 diabetes
Insulin is a medicine that helps your body use glucose (sugar) for energy.

You'll need to be prescribed insulin for type 2 diabetes if other diabetes medicines no longer work well enough to keep your blood glucose within a healthy range.

Sometimes you may only need to take insulin for a short time. For example:

if you're pregnant
if you're ill
to bring your blood glucose level down when you're first diagnosed
Insulin reduces the chances of getting the symptoms of high blood glucose (hyperglycaemia) and serious long-term problems that can damage your heart, kidneys, eyes and nerves.

How you take insulin
You can inject insulin using an insulin pen. This is a device that helps you inject safely and take the right dose.

Using an insulin pen does not usually hurt. The needles are very small, as you only inject a small amount just under your skin.

Your diabetes nurse will show you where to inject and how to use your pen.

Types of insulin for type 2 diabetes
People who need insulin for type 2 diabetes usually take either:

a long-acting or intermediate-acting insulin once or twice a day
a long-acting or intermediate-acting insulin once or twice a day, and a separate rapid-acting or short-acting insulin before meals
a mixed insulin (biphasic insulin), containing both intermediate and rapid-acting or short-acting insulin, 1 to 3 times a day before meals
Your doctor or diabetes care team will discuss your treatment with you and recommend the insulin treatment they think is best for you. The type of insulin you take and your dose may change over time.

Long-acting or intermediate-acting insulin
Your doctor or care team will usually recommend intermediate-acting insulin (brand names Humulin I or Insulatard). This type of insulin is taken once or twice a day.

They may recommend a type of long-acting insulin (brand names Levemir, Lantus, Toujeo, Tresiba, Semglee or Abasaglar) if you either:

often get low blood sugar (hypoglycaemia, or hypos)
need help from a carer to take injections
You'll usually take long-acting insulin once a day.

Rapid-acting or short-acting insulin
If a long-acting or intermediate-acting insulin does not lower your blood glucose enough on its own, you'll also need to take another type of insulin that works more quickly. You'll take these types of insulin before meals.

Your doctor or care team will recommend either:

rapid-acting insulin (brand names NovoRapid, Fiasp, Trurapi, Admelog, Humalog, Lyumjev or Apidra)
short-acting insulin (brand names Actrapid or Humulin S)
Biphasic (mixed) insulin
If you need both intermediate and rapid-acting insulin, your doctor or care team might recommend a mixed insulin instead of separate injections.

You'll take this type of insulin before meals, 1 to 3 times a day. It's less flexible than taking separate types, but it means you need fewer injections.

This is known as biphasic insulin (brand names NovoMix, Humalog Mix or Humulin M3).

Insulin for gestational diabetes
Insulin is a medicine that helps your body use glucose (sugar) for energy.

You'll need to be prescribed insulin for gestational diabetes if other treatments for gestational diabetes do not work well enough on their own to lower your blood glucose. For example, a healthy diet, regular exercise and taking metformin.

It can help prevent problems for you and your baby.

How you take insulin
You can inject insulin using an insulin pen. This is a device that helps you inject safely and take the right dose.

Using an insulin pen does not usually hurt. The needles are very small, as you only inject a small amount just under your skin.

Your diabetes nurse will show you where to inject and how to use your pen.

Blood glucose levels usually increase as your pregnancy progresses, so your insulin dose may need to be increased over time.

You can usually stop taking insulin once your baby is born. Your diabetes team will advise you on this.

Types of insulin for gestational diabetes
Your doctor or care team will discuss your treatment with you and recommend the insulin treatment they think is best for you.

Most people who need insulin treatment for gestational diabetes take a type of rapid-acting insulin (brand names include NovoRapid or Humalog) before meals.

You may also need another type of insulin that lasts for longer and is taken once a day. This is usually intermediate-acting insulin (Insulatard or Humulin I).

About irbesartan
Irbesartan is an angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) medicine widely used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension).

It relaxes and widens your blood vessels. This lowers your blood pressure and makes it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body.

It also helps to prevent future strokes, heart attacks and diabetic kidney disease.

If you have diabetic kidney disease, it helps to protect your kidneys and slows down the disease. It reduces high blood pressure and the amount of protein you lose through your kidneys.

Irbesartan is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets.

Key facts
Irbesartan is often used as a second-choice treatment. Your doctor may prescribe it if you had to stop taking a similar medicine because it gave you a dry, irritating cough.
The main side effects of irbesartan are feeling dizzy, headaches, feeling or being sick and low blood pressure (hypotension) – but they're usually mild and only last for a short time.
Tell your doctor if you get severe diarrhoea or vomiting from a stomach bug or illness. You may need to stop taking irbesartan for a while until you feel better.
Irbesartan is not recommended in pregnancy. Talk to your doctor if you're trying to get pregnant or you're already pregnant.
Irbesartan can make some people feel dizzy – especially when you first start taking it or after taking a bigger dose. If this happens to you, do not drive a car, ride a bike, or use tools or machinery.
Drinking alcohol can increase the blood pressure-lowering effect of irbesartan, which can make you feel dizzy or light-headed. Do not drink alcohol if it makes you feel dizzy.


About isosorbide mononitrate and isosorbide dinitrate
-Brand names: Chemydur XL, Isotard, Monomil XL, Elantan LA, Isoket Retard
Isosorbide mononitrate and isosorbide dinitrate are types of heart medicine called nitrates. They're similar medicines that work in the same way, but the doses are different, so you'll need to take the type that you're prescribed.

They're used to prevent angina symptoms (chest pain). They do not work to treat a current angina attack.

They're also taken with other medicines to treat heart failure including left ventricular failure.

They work by widening blood vessels and increasing the blood supply to your heart.

Isosorbide mononitrate and isosorbide dinitrate come as tablets or capsules. Isosorbide dinitrate also comes as an injection or drip (infusion), which is given in hospital.

Isosorbide mononitrate and isosorbide dinitrate are only available on prescription.

Key facts
Isosorbide mononitrate and isosorbide dinitrate tablets and capsules usually start to work within 1 hour.
Common side effects include headaches and feeling dizzy, weak or tired.
Do not drive a car or ride a bike if it makes you feel dizzy or tired.
Drinking alcohol can increase the effects of these medicines, and may make you feel dizzy, lightheaded or sleepy.
If you're going to have surgery, your doctor may advise you to stop taking isosorbide mononitrate or isosorbide dinitrate. They can lower you blood pressure too much when combined with some anaesthetics.


About isotretinoin capsules
Isotretinoin capsules are a treatment for severe acne (spots).

This medicine can have serious side effects, including side effects that can affect your mental health and sexual health.

Isotretinoin capsules must be prescribed and supervised by a specialist doctor. The doctor will discuss the side effects with you and help you decide whether it's right for you before they prescribe it.

Key facts
Isotretinoin capsules start to work after a week to 10 days. At the beginning of treatment, your skin may get worse before it starts to improve.
You will have a blood test before you start taking isotretinoin, and regular appointments and blood tests during your treatment to check for side effects.
Your lips and skin may become very dry and sensitive to sunlight during treatment. Using lip balm, moisturisers and a high protection sunscreen may help.
It's very important not to become pregnant while using isotretinoin capsules and for at least 1 month after stopping. This is because isotretinoin can harm an unborn baby. You'll be given a reminder card about this.
If you become depressed or anxious or think about harming yourself while taking isotretinoin, stop taking the medicine and tell your doctor straight away.
If you have symptoms of psychosis such as hallucinations (seeing or hearing things that are not there) or delusions (believing things that are not true), stop taking the medicine and tell your doctor straight away.
Talk to your doctor if you develop problems with your sex life such as erection problems, reduced sex drive, vaginal dryness, loss of feeling in your genitals or difficulty reaching orgasm.


sotretinoin gel (Isotrex)
About isotretinoin gel
Isotretinoin gel (Isotrex) has been discontinued by the manufacturer.

For information about other prescription medicines for acne, speak to your doctor or a pharmacist.

Isotretinoin also comes as capsules that you swallow. If you are looking for information on these, you can read about isotretinoin capsules (Roaccutane).




About ibuprofen and codeine
-Brand name: Nurofen Plus
You can buy ibuprofen and codeine combined as a single medicine from pharmacies.

It's used to treat a range of aches and pains, including:

headaches and migraine
back pain
period pain
toothache
sprains and strains
pain from arthritis
It's usually taken when everyday painkillers, such as paracetamol, ibuprofen or aspirin, have not worked on their own.

Each tablet usually contains 200mg of ibuprofen and 12.8mg of codeine.

Ibuprofen belongs to a group of medicines called NSAIDs (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs). It works by reducing hormones that cause pain and swelling in the body.

Codeine is from a group of medicines called opioids. It works in the central nervous system and the brain to block pain signals to the rest of the body. It also reduces the anxiety and stress caused by pain.

Key facts
If you buy combined ibuprofen and codeine from a pharmacy and your pain is not better after 3 days, it's important to ask your doctor or pharmacist for advice about ongoing pain relief.
You can become addicted to the codeine in this medicine, if you take it for too long. Only take it when you need it for pain relief.
Do not take more than 6 combined ibuprofen and codeine tablets in 24 hours.
It's best to take your tablets with food or a drink of milk. You'll be less likely to get indigestion or stomach pain.
The most common side effects are indigestion, feeling sleepy and constipation.
It's best not to drink alcohol when you're taking combined ibuprofen and codeine. You're more likely to get side effects like feeling sleepy.




About ketoconazole
-Brand names: Daktarin Gold, Daktarin Intensiv, Dandrazol, Nizoral
Ketoconazole is an antifungal medicine. It's used to treat skin infections caused by a fungus (yeast). It can also prevent them coming back.

It treats different types of fungal infections including:

athlete's foot
jock itch, an infection in the groin area
sweat rash (intertrigo), a rash that usually appears in folds of skin
dandruff and seborrhoeic dermatitis, where your scalp or other areas of your skin become scaly and dry or greasy
pityriasis versicolor, sometimes called tinea versicolor, where small patches of skin become scaly and change colour
Ketoconazole works by killing the fungus that causes the infection.

Ketoconazole is available as a cream or shampoo.

You can buy most ketoconazole creams and shampoos in pharmacies and shops. You can also get them on prescription. For treating pityriasis versicolor, you'll need a prescription.

Ketoconazole also comes as tablets but these usually only treat a rare condition called Cushing's syndrome. The tablets are available on prescription only, and they are not covered here.

Key facts
Ketoconazole usually works within 2 to 3 weeks for most fungal infections, but it can take 6 weeks for athlete's foot to get better.
The most common side effect of ketoconazole cream and shampoo is irritated skin.
For most infections, you'll usually use the cream once or twice a day and the shampoo twice a week.
Some people use ketoconazole shampoo every 1 to 2 weeks to help stop dandruff coming back.

About labetalol
Labetalol is a beta blocker medicine, used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension), including high blood pressure in pregnancy.

If you have high blood pressure, taking labetalol helps to prevent future heart disease, heart attacks and strokes.

It can also be used to prevent chest pain caused by angina.

Labetalol works by slowing down your heart rate and making it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body.

This medicine is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets. It can also be given as an injection in hospital.

Key facts
You'll usually take labetalol twice a day. Some people take it 3 or 4 times a day.
The most common side effects of labetalol are feeling dizzy, sleepy or weak, headaches, cold fingers and toes, and feeling or being sick (nausea and vomiting). These usually happen at the start of treatment and do not last long.
Labetalol is one of the first choice medicines for treating high blood pressure during pregnancy.
Do not stop taking labetalol suddenly, especially if you have heart disease. This can make your condition worse.
If you're taking labetalol for high blood pressure or angina, treatment is usually long term. You may take it for the rest of your life.


About lactulose
Lactulose is a laxative taken to treat constipation (difficulty pooing).

It's also taken to help a condition caused by severe liver disease called hepatic encephalopathy.

Lactulose comes as a sweet syrup that you swallow.

It's available on prescription and to buy from pharmacies.

Key facts
Lactulose relieves constipation by drawing water into your bowel to make poo softer.
The most common side effects are diarrhoea, bloating and wind. These are usually mild and do not last long.
Lactulose takes at least 2 days to work. Talk to your doctor if your constipation has not improved after 4 or 5 days.
If you find the taste of lactulose too sweet, you can dilute it with fruit juice or water.


About lamotrigine
Lamotrigine is a medicine used to treat epilepsy. It can also help prevent low mood (depression) in adults with bipolar disorder.

Seizures are bursts of electrical activity in the brain that temporarily affect how it works. Lamotrigine slows these electrical signals down to stop seizures.

Lamotrigine is available on prescription. It comes either as tablets you swallow, or tablets you chew or dissolve in water to make a drink.

Key facts
You'll usually take lamotrigine once or twice a day. You can take it with or without food.
It can take up to 6 weeks for lamotrigine to work. You may still have seizures or feel low during this time.
The most common side effects of lamotrigine are skin rashes and headaches.
You can drink alcohol with lamotrigine but it may make you feel sleepy or tired, and alcohol and hangovers can bring on seizures in some people with epilepsy.
Do not stop taking lamotrigine without talking to your doctor first.
If you have epilepsy, you're entitled to free prescriptions for all of your medicines, not just your epilepsy ones.


. About lansoprazole
Lansoprazole reduces the amount of acid your stomach makes. It's used for indigestion, heartburn, acid reflux and gastroesophageal-reflux-disease (GORD). Lansoprazole is also taken to prevent and treat stomach ulcers.

Sometimes, lansoprazole is taken for a rare condition caused by a tumour in the pancreas or gut called Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.

Lansoprazole is only available on prescription. It comes as capsules and tablets.

2. Key facts
You'll usually take lansoprazole once a day in the morning.
For severe illness, you can take it twice a day, in the morning and in the evening.
You should start to feel better in 2 to 3 days, but it may take up to 4 weeks for lansoprazole to fully control your acid symptoms.
Common side effects include headache, diarrhoea and stomach pain. These tend to be mild and go away when you stop taking the medicine.
Lansoprazole is not usually recommended during pregnancy.

About latanoprost
-Brand names: Xalatan, Monopost
Latanoprost is a prostaglandin analogue medicine that treats high pressure inside the eye and helps treat glaucoma.

High pressure is usually caused by fluid building up in the front part of the eye, which can then increase pressure inside the eye.

If not treated, high pressure can damage your optic nerve and cause vision loss or blindness.

Latanoprost is available on prescription only.

It comes as eye drops, either in eye drop bottles with a preservative in, or in single-dose droppers that are preservative-free.

You may sometimes be prescribed eye drops containing both latanoprost and timolol (a beta blocker).

Key facts
You’ll usually use latanoprost eye drops once a day.
The eye drops should help reduce the pressure within 3 to 4 hours.
Common side effects include permanent eye colour change, eyelash growth, and an increased sensitivity to light.
It's important to use your eye drops regularly and to go for check-ups, to make sure your vision is not getting worse.
Once open, a bottle of eye drops will last for up to 4 weeks and a single dose dropper should be thrown away straight after use.


axatives are a type of medicine that can treat constipation.

They're often used if lifestyle changes, such as increasing the amount of fibre in your diet, drinking plenty of fluid and taking regular exercise, have not helped.

Laxatives are available to buy from pharmacies and supermarkets. They're also available on prescription from a doctor.

Types of laxatives
There are 4 main types of laxatives.

Bulk-forming laxatives
Bulk-forming laxatives work by increasing the "bulk" or weight of poo, which in turn stimulates your bowel.

They take 2 or 3 days to work.

Bulk-forming laxatives include:

Fybogel (ispaghula husk)
methylcellulose
Osmotic laxatives 
Osmotic laxatives draw water from the rest of the body into your bowel to soften poo and make it easier to pass.

They take 2 or 3 days to work.

They include:

lactulose (also called by the brand names Duphalac and Lactugal)
macrogol (also called by the brand names Movicol, Laxido, CosmoCol, Molaxole and Molative)
polyethylene glycol
Stimulant laxatives
These stimulate the muscles that line your gut, helping them to move poo along to your back passage.

They take 6 to 12 hours to work.

They include:

bisacodyl (also called by the brand name Dulcolax)
senna (also called by the brand name Senokot)
sodium picosulfate
Poo-softener laxatives
This type of laxative works by letting water into poo to soften it and make it easier to pass.

They include:

arachis oil
docusate
Which laxative should I use?
It's difficult to know whether a particular laxative will work better than another. It depends on the person.

Unless there's a reason why a type of laxative may be more suitable for you than another:

start with a bulk-forming laxative
if your poo remains hard, try using an osmotic laxative in addition to, or instead of, a bulk-forming laxative
if your poo is soft but is still difficult to pass, try taking a stimulant laxative in addition to a bulk-forming laxative
Speak to a GP or pharmacist if you're unsure which laxative to use.

Also see a GP if you're still constipated after trying all of the different types of laxative, or you think your child might benefit from taking laxatives.

Things to consider
Laxatives are not suitable for everyone.

They're not usually recommended for:

children (unless advised by a doctor)
people with certain health conditions, such as Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis
Before using a laxative, read about it in our Medicines guide or the patient information leaflet that comes with the medicine to make sure it's safe for you to take.

Find out more about the considerations about laxatives

How to take laxatives
How you take a laxative depends on the form it comes in.

They're commonly available as:

tablets or capsules you swallow
sachets of powder you mix with water and then drink
a capsule you place inside your bottom (rectum), where it'll dissolve (suppositories)
liquids or gels that you place directly into your bottom
Some laxatives have to be taken at certain times of the day, such as first thing in the morning or last thing at night.

Ask a pharmacist for advice if you're not sure how to take your laxative.

If you're taking bulk-forming or osmotic laxatives, it's important to drink plenty of fluids. This is because these laxatives can cause dehydration.

Never take more than the recommended dose of laxatives as this can be harmful and cause side effects.

How long should I take laxatives for?
Ideally, only take laxatives occasionally and for up to a week at a time.

Stop taking a laxative when your constipation improves.

If your constipation has not improved after taking laxatives for a week, speak to a GP.

After taking a laxative, you can make certain lifestyle changes to help stop getting constipated again, such as:

drinking plenty of water
exercising regularly
including more fibre in your diet
These are better ways of preventing constipation than using laxatives.

Do not take laxatives every day to ease your constipation as this can be harmful.

Speak to a GP if you're still constipated after making lifestyle changes.

In some cases, you may be prescribed a laxative to use regularly, but this should always be supervised by a GP or gastroenterologist (a specialist in gut problems).

The side effects of laxatives
Like most medicines, laxatives can cause side effects. They're usually mild and should pass once you stop taking the laxative.

The side effects you may get will depend on the type of laxative you're taking, but common side effects of most laxatives include:

bloating
farting
tummy cramps
feeling sick
dehydration, which can make you feel lightheaded, have headaches and have pee that's a darker colour than normal
Ask a GP for advice if you get any particularly troublesome or persistent side effects while taking laxatives.

Using laxatives too often or for too long can also cause diarrhoea, the bowel becoming blocked by large, dry poo (intestinal obstruction), and unbalanced salts and minerals in your body.

Self-help alternatives to laxatives
It's often possible to improve constipation without using laxatives.

It may help to:

increase your daily intake of fibre – try to eat about 30g of fibre a day; read about how to increase the fibre in your diet
add bulking agents, such as wheat bran, to your diet – these will help make your poo softer and easier to pass, although bran and fibre can sometimes make bloating worse
drink plenty of water
exercise regularly


About lercanidipine
Lercanidipine is a calcium channel blocker medicine used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension).

If you have high blood pressure, taking lercanidipine helps prevent heart disease, heart attacks and strokes.

Lercanidipine is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets.

Key facts
Lercanidipine lowers your blood pressure and makes it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body.
Lercanidipine starts to work on the day you start taking it, but it may take a couple of weeks to take full effect.
You'll usually take lercanidipine once a day. You can take it at any time of day, but try to make sure it's around the same time each day.
You do not need to take it on an empty stomach, but fatty food can increase the amount of lercanidipine your body takes in and make you more likely to have side effects. It's best to take it at least 15 minutes before a meal.
Do not eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice while you're taking lercanidipine. It can increase the amount of lercanidipine in your body and cause side effects.


About letrozole
-Brand name: Femara
Letrozole is a medicine used to treat breast cancer and help to prevent breast cancer coming back.

It's mainly prescribed for women who have been through the menopause and have a type of cancer called hormone-dependent breast cancer.

Most people who take letrozole will have had primary treatment such as surgery, radiotherapy or sometimes chemotherapy to treat their breast cancer first. Letrozole is an additional (adjuvant) treatment which helps stop the cancer coming back.

Letrozole is sometimes given alongside another breast cancer medicine, called tamoxifen.

Letrozole is available on prescription only and comes as tablets.

It can also be used:

to prevent breast cancer if you're high risk and have been through the menopause
to treat cancer if you cannot have surgery, or to shrink the cancer before surgery if you cannot have chemotherapy
It can sometimes be used to treat breast cancer in men, or in women who have not reached the menopause.

Letrozole can occasionally be used as a fertility treatment if you have polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). If you're taking it as a fertility treatment and you need more information, speak to your specialist.

Find out more about medicines used as fertility treatments.

Find out more about polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).

Key facts
You'll usually take letrozole once a day. Try to take it at the same time each day.
Most people take letrozole for 5 years, but some will take it for up to 10 years.
Common side effects include symptoms similar to the menopause such as hot flushes, tiredness and low mood. Side effects usually improve after a few months.
Your doctor will monitor your blood pressure, cholesterol levels and bone density during your treatment.
If letrozole makes you feel tired or dizzy, or if you get blurred vision, do not drive a car, ride a bike, or use tools or machinery until you feel better.


About levetiracetam
Levetiracetam is a medicine used to treat epilepsy.

Seizures are bursts of electrical activity in the brain that temporarily affect how it works. Levetiracetam slows these electrical signals down to stop seizures.

Levetiracetam is available on prescription. It comes as tablets, a liquid and granules.

Key facts
You'll usually start taking levetiracetam once a day and increase to twice a day.
The most common side effects of levetiracetam are headaches, feeling sleepy and a blocked nose or itchy throat.
Levetiracetam can make you feel sleepy, tired or dizzy when you start taking it or increase your dose. It can also affect your vision. If this happens to you, do not drive, ride a bike or operate machinery until this goes away.
It can take a few weeks for levetiracetam to work. You may still have seizures during this time.
If you have epilepsy, you're entitled to free prescriptions for all of your medicines, not just your epilepsy ones. You'll need a medical exemption certificate to claim your free prescriptions.


1. About levothyroxine
Levothyroxine is a medicine used to treat an underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism).

The thyroid gland makes thyroid hormones which help to control energy levels and growth. Levothyroxine is taken to replace the missing thyroid hormone thyroxine.

Levothyroxine is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets or as a liquid that you swallow.

2. Key facts
Levothyroxine is a synthetic version of a hormone called thyroxine. It replaces thyroxine if your thyroid gland cannot produce it and prevents the symptoms of hypothyroidism.
Levothyroxine starts working straight away, but it may be several weeks before your symptoms start to improve.
The most common side effects of levothyroxine are caused by taking a bigger dose than you need. Your doctor can lower your dose to help reduce any side effects.
Before you start taking levothyroxine, your doctor will do a blood test. Once you start taking the medicine you'll have regular blood tests to see how well it's working.
Levothyroxine doses need to be carefully monitored during pregnancy. If you're planning to become pregnant or think you may be pregnant, it's important to talk to your doctor to get the right care for you and your baby.


About lidocaine for mouth and throat
-Brand names: Bonjela, Anbesol, Iglu, Calgel, Covonia
Lidocaine is a local anaesthetic that numbs the area where you use it. It's used in some medicines to treat:

mouth ulcers
sore throats
teething
soreness caused by false teeth (dentures)
Lidocaine treatments for mouth and throat come as gels, ointments, liquids, sprays and lozenges.

You can buy them from a pharmacy. Some treatments are also available to buy in shops.

Nearly all lidocaine mouth and throat treatments contain other active ingredients, such as antiseptics to help kill germs.

There are different types of lidocaine for other conditions, including medicated plasters, skin creams and suppositories.

Find out more about using lidocaine skin cream and lidocaine for piles and itchy bottom.

Key facts
Lidocaine numbs pain quickly. You should start to feel better within 30 minutes.
It's generally a safe medicine and side effects are rare.
If your baby is teething, check the instructions carefully before giving them lidocaine. Not all treatments are suitable for young children.
For teething, it's best to try other things such as teething rings first before using a medicine. Read about tips for helping your teething baby.
Be careful of having hot food and drinks after using lidocaine. The numbing effect means you could burn your mouth.

About lidocaine for piles and itchy bottom
-Brand names: Anusol, Boots Haemorrhoid, Germaloids, Perinal, Xylopract
Lidocaine is a local anaesthetic that numbs the area where you use it. It's used in some medicines to treat:

piles (haemorrhoids) inside or around your bottom (anus)
itchy bottom
These treatments do not cure piles but they can help with the pain and itching.

Lidocaine treatments for piles come as creams, ointments, sprays and suppositories. You can buy them from a pharmacy.

Some treatments contain lidocaine mixed with a corticosteroid like hydrocortisone. If you're using hydrocortisone treatments for piles, check the leaflet that comes with your medicine as the instructions are different.

There are different types of lidocaine for other conditions, including medicated plasters, injections and gels.

Find out more about using lidocaine for mouth and throat for mouth ulcers, teething or sore throat, or lidocaine skin cream for numbing the skin before a procedure involving a needle.

Key facts
Lidocaine treatments are used in different ways. Some creams and ointments are for internal use inside your bottom (anus) only, while others go on your skin. Always check the instructions.
You'll generally use lidocaine for piles or itchy bottom several times a day – first thing in the morning, last thing at night and every time you poo.
It works quickly and you should start to feel better within 1 hour.
Most people do not have any side effects from lidocaine for piles or itchy bottom. You might get a burning feeling when you first put it on, but this only lasts a few minutes.
Do not use lidocaine for longer than recommended. The local anaesthetic can make your skin sensitive over time or if you use it for too long.


About lidocaine skin cream
-Brand names: Denela, EMLA, LMX4, Nulbia
Lidocaine is a local anaesthetic. Using the skin cream makes your skin numb. It works by stopping nerves from sending pain signals to your brain.

You can use it before having blood taken or having a drip put in. Your doctor or nurse may also tell you to use it before having a small surgical procedure.

Lidocaine skin cream is available on prescription.

You can also buy it from a pharmacy to use before any cosmetic procedure involving a needle.

Some of the skin creams contain lidocaine mixed with other local anaesthetics such as prilocaine.

There are different types of lidocaine for other conditions, including mouth gels, throat sprays, suppositories and medicated plasters.

Find out more about using lidocaine for mouth and throat for mouth ulcers, teething or sore throat, or lidocaine for piles and itchy bottom.

Key facts
Lidocaine skin cream works quite quickly. Most people will start to feel a numbing effect within 30 to 60 minutes.
Only use the cream on undamaged skin. Do not put it on cuts or grazes.
Lidocaine skin cream is generally very safe. The most common side effects are itching and tingling.
Avoid scratching or rubbing the treated area of skin, or exposing it to extreme heat or cold, until the numbing effect has worn off.
If you buy lidocaine skin cream from a pharmacy to use before a cosmetic procedure, tell the person doing the procedure that you've used it.


About linagliptin
Linagliptin is a medicine used to treat type 2 diabetes.

Type 2 diabetes is a condition where the body does not make enough insulin, or the insulin that it makes does not work properly. This can cause high blood sugar levels (hyperglycaemia).

Linagliptin is usually prescribed when a healthy diet and exercise alone have not been enough to control your blood sugar levels.

It works by increasing the amount of insulin that your body makes. Insulin is the hormone that controls sugar levels in your blood.

Linagliptin is only available on prescription.

It comes as tablets. It also comes as tablets containing a mixture of linagliptin and metformin (called Jantadueto) and as tablets containing a mixture of linagliptin and empagliflozin (called Glyxambi).

Key facts
Linagliptin starts to work within a few hours. You need to take it every day to make sure your blood sugar stays as stable as possible.
You take linagliptin once a day.
Most people have no side effects, or only minor ones, when taking linagliptin.
It will not usually make you put on or lose weight.
If you have diabetes, you're entitled to free prescriptions for all of your medicines, not just your diabetes ones.

About lisinopril
Lisinopril is a medicine to treat high blood pressure (hypertension) and heart failure.

It's also prescribed after a heart attack and helps prevent future strokes and heart attacks. It also improves your survival if you're taking it after a recent heart attack or for heart failure.

It works by widening your blood vessels and making it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body.

It can also be used for diabetic kidney disease, to slow down the disease.

Lisinopril is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets.

It also comes as a liquid for people who find it hard to swallow tablets.

Lisinopril is also available combined with another blood pressure medicine called hydrochlorothiazide. This is called by the brand names Zestoretic or Lisoretic.

Key facts
Lisinopril lowers your blood pressure and makes it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body.
Your very first dose of lisinopril may make you feel dizzy, so it's best to take it at bedtime. After the first dose, if you do not feel dizzy, you can take lisinopril at any time of day. Try to take it at the same time every day.
Some people get a dry, tickly cough with lisinopril. If this happens your doctor might suggest you change to a different medicine.
If you get severe diarrhoea or vomiting from a stomach bug or illness, tell your doctor. You may need to stop taking lisinopril for a while until you feel better.
Drinking alcohol with lisinopril can make you feel dizzy or lightheaded. It's best to stop drinking alcohol until you see how the medicine affects you.


About lithium
-Brand names: Priadel, Camcolit, Liskonum, Li-Liquid
Lithium is a type of medicine known as a mood stabiliser. It's used to treat mood disorders such as:

mania (feeling highly excited, overactive or distracted)
hypo-mania (similar to mania, but less severe)
regular periods of depression, where treatment with other medicines has not worked
bipolar disorder, where your mood changes between feeling very high (mania) and very low (depression)
Lithium can also help reduce aggressive or self-harming behaviour.

Lithium is available on prescription.

It comes as regular tablets or slow-release tablets (lithium carbonate). Brand names for the tablets include Priadel, Camcolit and Liskonum. It also comes as a liquid that you swallow (lithium citrate). Common brands of lithium liquid are Priadel and Li-liquid.

Key facts
Lithium may take several weeks or months to work.
Common side effects of lithium are feeling or being sick, diarrhoea, a dry mouth and a metallic taste in the mouth.
You'll have regular blood tests to check how much lithium is in your blood. These results will be recorded in your lithium record book.
You'll be given a lithium alert card to keep with you at all times. In an emergency, this will let health professionals know you're taking lithium.
Try to avoid a low-sodium (low-salt) diet as this can increase the levels of lithium in your blood and increase the chance of getting side effects.

About loperamide
-Brand name: Imodium
Loperamide is a medicine to treat diarrhoea (runny poo). It can help with short-term diarrhoea or irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).

Loperamide is also used for recurring or longer lasting diarrhoea from bowel conditions such as Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis and short bowel syndrome.

Diarrhoea that starts suddenly usually gets better on its own within 5 to 7 days. If you need immediate short-term relief, taking loperamide can reduce the number of times you go to the toilet and it makes your poo less watery.

Loperamide works by slowing down food as it goes through your gut. Your body can then draw in more water from your intestines, so that your poos get firmer and you poo less often.

If you have a colostomy (where part of your bowel is brought through an opening made in your tummy, called a stoma) you may be prescribed loperamide. If you have a lot of poo and fluids coming through it, your stoma team may advise you to take high doses of loperamide to make your poo thicker and reduce the flow.

You can buy loperamide from pharmacies and shops. It's also available on prescription for treating some bowel conditions.

It comes as tablets, including tablets that dissolve on your tongue, and capsules. The tablets that dissolve are called Imodium Instants or Imodium Instant Melts.

Loperamide is also available combined with simeticone. Simeticone is used to treat farting (flatulence or wind). Taking these medicines together helps if you have diarrhoea with painful stomach cramps and bloating.

Loperamide mixed with simeticone is known by several brand names including Imodium Plus Caplets and Imodium Plus Comfort Tablets.

Key facts
Loperamide usually starts to make your diarrhoea better within 1 hour.
If you buy loperamide from a pharmacy or shop, do not take it for more than 48 hours without talking to a doctor.
Only take the recommended amount. Too much loperamide can cause serious heart problems (including a fast or irregular heartbeat).
Do not drive, cycle or use machinery or tools if loperamide makes you feel dizzy, tired or sleepy.
It's best not to drink alcohol while you're taking loperamide. Alcohol makes you more likely to have side effects.
Pharmacies and shops may sell their own brands of loperamide, usually called anti-diarrhoea or diarrhoea relief capsules or tablets.
Some products have IBS in the name. However, they're no different from others. If you have IBS you can also use brands without IBS in the name.



1. About loratadine
Loratadine is an antihistamine medicine that helps with the symptoms of allergies. It's used to treat:

hay fever
conjunctivitis (red, itchy eyes)
eczema
hives (urticaria)
reactions to insect bites and stings
some food allergies
Loratadine is known as a non-drowsy antihistamine. It's much less likely to make you feel sleepy than some other antihistamines.

Loratadine is available on prescription. You can also buy it from pharmacies and supermarkets.

It comes as tablets or as a liquid that you swallow.

2. Key facts
You'll usually take loratadine once a day.
Loratadine is classed as a non-drowsy antihistamine, but some people still find it makes them feel slightly sleepy.
Children may have a headache and feel tired or nervous after taking loratadine.
It's best not to drink alcohol while you're taking loratadine as it can make you feel sleepy.



About lorazepam
-Brand name: Ativan
Lorazepam belongs to a group of medicines called benzodiazepines.

It's used to treat anxiety and sleeping problems that are related to anxiety.

It can also be taken to help you relax before an operation or other medical or dental treatment. This is known as a pre-med.

It's thought to work by increasing the levels of a calming chemical in your brain called gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA).

Lorazepam is available on prescription only. It comes as tablets and as a liquid that you swallow.

It can also be given as an injection in hospital if you're having a seizure or fit.

Key facts
Lorazepam tablets and liquid start to work in around 20 to 30 minutes. The full sedating effect lasts for around 6 to 8 hours.
The most common side effect is feeling sleepy (drowsy) during the daytime.
It's not recommended to take lorazepam for longer than 4 weeks.
If lorazepam makes you feel sleepy, do not drive, ride a bike or use tools or machinery.
Do not drink alcohol while taking lorazepam. It can make you sleep very deeply. You may have breathing problems and difficulty waking up.

About losartan
Losartan is a medicine called angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB). It's widely used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension) and heart failure. It's also used to protect your kidneys if you have both kidney disease and diabetes (diabetic kidney disease).

Losartan can also help to prevent strokes and heart attacks, and is used to improve your survival if you're taking it for heart failure or after a heart attack.

Like other ARBs, losartan relaxes and widens your blood vessels. This lowers your blood pressure and makes it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body.

Losartan can also be combined with hydrochlorothizide and is called by the brand name Cozaar-Comp.

This medicine is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets.

Key facts
Losartan is often used as a second-choice treatment. Your doctor might prescribe it if you had to stop taking another medicine to lower your blood pressure because it gave you a dry, irritating cough.
If you have diarrhoea and vomiting from a stomach bug or illness while taking losartan, tell your doctor. You may need to stop taking it until you feel better.
The main side effects of losartan are feeling dizzy and tired, but they're usually mild and do not last long.
Losartan can make you feel dizzy, especially when you first start taking it or after taking a bigger dose. If this happens, do not drive a car, ride a bike, or use tools or machinery until you feel better.
Losartan is not normally recommended in pregnancy or while breastfeeding. Talk to your doctor if you're trying to get pregnant, are already pregnant or you're breastfeeding.
Do not use salt substitutes such as Lo-Salt. This is because they are high in potassium and when mixed with losartan, they may cause potassium levels in your blood to be too high.


About low-dose aspirin
Low-dose aspirin helps to prevent heart attacks and strokes in people who are at high risk of them. Aspirin is also known as acetylsalicylic acid.

Your doctor may suggest that you take a daily low dose if you have had a stroke or a heart attack to help stop you having another one.

Or, if you're at high risk of heart attack – for example, if you have had heart surgery or if you have chest pain (angina) caused by heart disease.

If you’re pregnant, you may be recommended to take low-dose aspirin if:

you’re at risk of high blood pressure (pre-eclampsia)
you have underlying medical conditions where you have been advised to take low dose aspirin
you have had several miscarriages or complications in a previous pregnancy
Only take daily low-dose aspirin if your doctor recommends it.

Low-dose aspirin comes as tablets, including tablets that dissolve in a drink of water (soluble) and tablets with a special coating (enteric coated/gastro-resistant) to help to protect your stomach.

It's available on prescription. You can also buy it from pharmacies. However, if you’re pregnant, or having fertility treatment, low-dose aspirin will need to be prescribed by your doctor, a pregnancy specialist (obstetrician) or a midwife.

Children are sometimes treated with low-dose aspirin after heart surgery or to treat a rare condition called Kawasaki disease. Children should only take low-dose aspirin if a doctor prescribes it.

Taking low-dose aspirin to prevent heart attacks and strokes is not the same as taking aspirin for pain relief.

Key facts
Daily low-dose aspirin makes your blood less sticky and helps to prevent heart attacks and stroke.
You’ll usually take a dose of 75mg once a day. Sometimes, doses are higher.
It's best to take low-dose aspirin with food so it does not upset your stomach.
Only take low-dose aspirin if your doctor or midwife recommends it, especially if you are pregnant or breastfeeding.
Carry on taking daily low-dose aspirin even if you feel well, as you'll still be getting the benefits.


About lymecycline
Lymecycline is an antibiotic. It's used mainly for spots (acne).

It's also used to treat infections such as:

chest and sinus infections
sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
infections in, or around, the mouth
Lymecycline works to kill bacteria by stopping them making the proteins that they need to survive.

Key facts
For acne, you'll usually take lymecycline once a day.
Common side effects are feeling sick, stomach pain, diarrhoea and headaches. But these tend to be mild and do not last long.
Some people get a fungal infection called thrush after taking a course of antibiotics like lymecycline. Symptoms include redness and itching in the mouth. Women may get vaginal itching. If this happens to you, talk to your doctor or pharmacist for advice.
You can drink alcohol while taking lymecycline.
Lymecycline is not recommended if you're pregnant.




About macrogol
-Brand names: Movicol, Laxido, CosmoCol, Molaxole
Macrogol (or macrogols) is a laxative taken to treat constipation (difficulty pooing).

You can also use it to help clear a build-up of hard poo in your bowel, which can happen if you've been constipated for a long time (faecal impaction).

It can also be given before a colonoscopy (a test to check inside your bowels) to empty your bowels before the test.

Macrogol comes as sachets of powder that you mix with water to make a drink, a ready-mixed liquid to drink, or a liquid that you dilute before drinking.

It's available on prescription and to buy from pharmacies.

Children under 12 years can only take certain brands of macrogol and it must be prescribed for them. Brands prescribed for children include CosmoCol Paediatric and Movicol Paediatric.

Key facts
Macrogol relieves constipation by making your poo slightly bigger and softer. This helps poo travel through your bowels more easily.
Macrogol can take 1 to 2 days to work. Talk to a doctor if you're still constipated after 3 days.
The most common side effects are stomach pain, diarrhoea, wind and a sore bottom (anus). These are usually mild and do not last long.
Most macrogol sachets contain sodium chloride, potassium chloride and sodium bicarbonate (known as electrolytes).
The powder sachets are usually flavoured, but if you do not like the flavour you can add fruit squash to the drink.



About mebendazole
-Brand names: Ovex, Vermox
Mebendazole is a type of medicine for treating worms.

It's used mainly for infections of the gut such as threadworms (sometimes known as pinworms) and other less common worm infections (whipworm, roundworm and hookworm).

It works by stopping worms from using sugar (glucose) to live. This kills the worms.

You can buy mebendazole from a pharmacy for adults and children aged 2 years and over. It's also available on prescription for children aged 6 months and over.

It comes as chewable tablets or a liquid that you swallow.

Key facts
You'll usually take mebendazole as a single dose to treat threadworms, but you might need to take it for around 3 days for some other types of worm infection.
It starts to work straight away but it may take several days to kill all the worms.
Mebendazole kills worms but not their eggs. You may need to take a second dose after 2 weeks. It's also important to have good personal hygiene to help stop the worms coming back.
The most common side effect is stomach pain.
A doctor or pharmacist may also advise that everyone in your house is treated with mebendazole.


About mebeverine
-Brand names: Colofac, Colofac IBS, Aurobeverine
Mebeverine (sometimes called mebeverine hydrochloride) is a type of medicine known as an antispasmodic. It helps with muscle spasms.

It can be used to ease painful stomach cramps if you have irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) or other conditions. It works by relaxing certain muscles in your gut.

Mebeverine comes as tablets or slow-release capsules (also called modified release).

It's available on prescription. You can also buy mebeverine tablets for IBS symptoms at a pharmacy without a prescription, but only if you've been diagnosed with IBS.

Mebeverine is also available mixed with a laxative called ispaghula husk (brand name Fybogel Mebeverine). If you have IBS you can take this to treat constipation.

Key facts
Take mebeverine 20 minutes before you have a meal.
Mebeverine starts to work after 1 hour.
Mebeverine is generally safe and you're unlikely to have side effects. Some people may get a mild itchy rash (hives).


Medical cannabis (and cannabis oils)
"Medical cannabis" is a broad term for any sort of cannabis-based medicine used to relieve symptoms.

Many cannabis-based products are available to buy online, but their quality and content is not known. They may be illegal in the UK and potentially dangerous.

Some products that might claim to be medical cannabis, such as CBD oil or hemp oil, are available to buy legally as food supplements from health stores. But there's no guarantee these are of good quality or provide any health benefits.

Specific cannabis-based products are available on prescription as medicinal cannabis. These are only likely to benefit a very small number of patients.

Can I get a prescription for medical cannabis?
Very few people in England are likely to get an NHS prescription for medical cannabis.

Currently, it is only likely to be prescribed for the following conditions:

children and adults with rare, severe forms of epilepsy
adults with vomiting or nausea caused by chemotherapy
people with muscle stiffness and spasms caused by multiple sclerosis (MS)
It would only be considered when other treatments were not suitable or had not helped.

Epidyolex for children and adults with epilepsy
Epidyolex is a highly purified liquid containing CBD (cannabidiol).

CBD is a chemical substance found in cannabis that has medical benefits.

It will not get you high, because it does not contain THC (tetrahydrocannabinol), the chemical in cannabis that makes you high.

Epidyolex can be prescribed by a specialist for patients with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and Dravet syndrome (both rare forms of epilepsy).

Nabilone for chemotherapy patients
Many people having chemotherapy will have periods where they feel sick or vomit.

Nabilone can be prescribed to adults by a specialist to help relieve these symptoms, but only when other treatments have not helped or are not suitable.

Nabilone is a medicine, taken as a capsule, that has been developed to act in a similar way to THC (the chemical in cannabis that makes you high). You may have heard it described as a "manmade form of cannabis".

Nabiximols (Sativex) for multiple sclerosis (MS)
Nabiximols (Sativex) is a cannabis-based medicine that is sprayed into the mouth.

It is licensed in the UK for adults with MS-related muscle spasticity that has not got better with other treatments.

Read more from the MS Society on Sativex for treating muscle stiffness and spasms

Long-term pain
There is some evidence medical cannabis can help certain types of pain, though this evidence is not yet strong enough to recommend it for pain relief.

In some cases, however, it may be prescribed for pain as part of a clinical trial.

What about products available to buy?
Some cannabis-based products are available to buy over the internet without a prescription.

It's likely most of these products – even those called CBD oils – will be illegal to possess or supply. There's a good chance they will contain THC, and may not be safe to use.

Health stores sell certain types of CBD. However, there's no guarantee these products will be of good quality.

They tend to only contain very small amounts of CBD, so it's not clear what effect they would have.

Is medical cannabis safe?
The risks of using cannabis products containing THC (the chemical that gets you high) are not currently clear. That's why clinical trials are needed before they can be used. Products that only contain CBD, such as Epidyolex, do not carry these unknown risks linked with THC.

But in reality, most products will contain a certain amount of THC.

The potential risks of THC cannabis products are:

psychosis – there is evidence that regular cannabis use in some people can increase the risk of developing a psychotic illness such as schizophrenia
dependency on the medicine – although scientists believe this risk is probably small when its use is controlled and monitored by a specialist doctor
Generally, the more THC the product contains, the greater these risks are.

Cannabis bought illegally off the street, where the quality, ingredients and strength are not known, is the most dangerous form to use.


Medicines information
This page explains the different types of medicine, the difference between branded drugs and generics, and how the medicines become available.

Which medicines can I buy without prescription?
Some medicines for minor illnesses can be bought over the counter without a prescription, so you can treat yourself without needing to see a GP.

Simple painkillers and cough remedies, for example, can be bought directly from supermarkets and other stores.

Other types of medicine, such as eyedrops or emergency contraception, are available without a prescription but need a pharmacist's supervision, so are only available to buy from behind the pharmacy counter. The pharmacist may ask you questions to make sure the medicine is suitable for you.

Prescription-only medicines, such as antibiotics, must be prescribed by a qualified health professional.

This may be a GP, hospital doctor, dentist, nurse, pharmacist, optometrist, physiotherapist, podiatrist, paramedic or therapeutic radiographer.

Buying medicines online
You can also buy medicines online. But be very careful if you do this, as many websites sell fake medicines.

Many websites selling medicines are not registered as pharmacies, so buying from them is potentially unsafe. Medicine from an unregistered website could be dangerous to your health because it might be out of date, diluted or fake, or may not be suitable for you.

It's best to see your GP before buying medicines online as they know your medical history and can advise you whether the medicine would be suitable.

If you choose to buy medicines online, ensure that:

any online pharmacy is registered with the General Pharmaceutical Council (GPhC)
any online doctor service is registered with the Care Quality Commission (CQC) and the General Medical Council (GMC)
Brand names versus generics
Many medicines have at least 2 different names:

the brand name – created by the pharmaceutical company that made the medicine
the generic name – the name of the active ingredient in the medicine
For example, sildenafil is the generic name of a medicine used to treat erectile dysfunction. But the company that makes sildenafil, Pfizer, sells it under the brand name Viagra.

Companies take out exclusive rights called patents on each new medicine they discover. If a company has a patent on a medicine, only that company can market it under their brand name once it's been granted a licence.

Once the patent expires, other manufacturers can market generic versions. The generic versions will be the same as the branded medicine because they contain the same active ingredients.

They are used more often by the NHS because they're just as effective but cost far less. It's similar to buying branded goods or a supermarket's own label – the supermarket's version is usually cheaper.

If the name of your prescription medicine keeps changing, it might be because you're being given different brands of the same medicine, or the generic version rather than the branded one.

How new medicines become available
Licensed medicines
Before any new medicine can be used to treat people in the UK, it goes through a strictly monitored development process.

This involves researching the medicine in the lab and testing it in clinical trials. After passing the clinical trials, a licence will be granted before it can be made available for wider use.

Read more about clinical trials.

Licences are only granted if strict safety and quality standards are met. In the UK, licences are granted by the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA).

Licences confirm the health condition the medicine should be used for and the recommended dosage.

This can be found in the information leaflet that comes with the medicine. The dosage instructions are usually on the label of the medicine packet.

Unlicensed medicines
Sometimes a healthcare professional may recommend that you take an off-label or unlicensed medicine.

Off-label use means that the medicine isn't licensed for treatment of your condition. But the medicine will have a licence to treat another condition and will have undergone clinical trials for this.

Your doctor may recommend an unlicensed medication if they think it will treat your condition effectively and the benefits are greater than any risks.

Safety of medicines
No medicine is completely risk free, but the MHRA tries to ensure any medicine approved for treating people in the UK is as safe as possible.

Medicines continue to be carefully regulated after they've been licensed. This involves checking for problems and previously unknown side effects.

In rare cases, medicines may be withdrawn if there are serious safety concerns or the risks of the medicines outweigh the benefits.

You can help the MHRA monitor the safety of medicines by reporting any suspected side effects to the Yellow Card Scheme. Reports can also be made on behalf of someone you're caring for.



About medroxyprogesterone tablets
-Brand names: Climanor, Provera
Medroxyprogesterone (also known as medroxyprogesterone acetate) is a type of medicine called a progestogen. Progestogens are similar to a natural hormone made in the body called progesterone.

Medroxyprogesterone works in the same way as natural progesterone, but has stronger effects.

It's used for hormonal conditions, including heavy periods, endometriosis, polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and symptoms of the menopause. It's also sometimes used for hot flushes caused by treatments for prostate cancer.

Medroxyprogesterone tablets are only available on prescription.

Other types of medroxyprogesterone
Medroxyprogesterone also comes as an injection that's used as contraception.

It also comes mixed with another hormone called oestrogen. This is used as a type of hormone replacement therapy (HRT), for menopause symptoms.

High dose medroxyprogesterone tablets (100mg, 200mg and 400mg) are used to treat some types of cancer.

Read about medroxyprogesterone for treating cancer from Macmillan

Key facts
Medroxyprogesterone tablets start working straight away, but they can take 2 or 3 months to work fully.
How long you take medroxyprogesterone tablets for depends on why you're taking them. They're often used for short courses over 2 or 3 months.
Common side effects include headaches, feeling sick (nausea) and changes to your periods.
Medroxyprogesterone tablets do not work as contraception and you could get pregnant while taking them. It's important to use another method of contraception such as condoms.
If medroxyprogesterone tablets make you feel dizzy or tired, do not drive, cycle or use tools or machinery until you feel better.

About melatonin
-Brand names: Circadin, Adaflex, Ceyesto, Slenyto, Syncrodin
Melatonin is a hormone that occurs naturally in your body. At night, your levels of melatonin rise, before returning to normal during the day. This helps to control how and when you sleep.

You can take a synthetic version of melatonin for short periods if you have sleep problems such as insomnia. This adds to your body's natural supply of melatonin, so you fall asleep more quickly and you're less likely to wake up during the night. It may also help with symptoms of jetlag.

Melatonin is mainly used to treat short-term sleep problems in people aged 55 and over. It can also sometimes be prescribed by specialists to help with longer-term sleep problems in some children and adults.

Melatonin is available on prescription only. It comes as standard tablets, slow release tablets, capsules and a liquid that you drink.

Key facts
Melatonin takes around 1 to 2 hours to work.
You'll usually take melatonin for up to 13 weeks but some people may need it for longer.
Some people may get a headache, or feel tired, sick or irritable the day after taking melatonin.
Drinking alcohol or smoking while taking melatonin can stop it working as well as it should.
If you're taking melatonin to help you sleep, do not take any herbal remedies which may affect sleep at the same time. This may make you very drowsy.

About memantine
-Brand names: Ebixa, Nemdatine, Valios
Memantine is a medicine for dementia. It is used to treat memory loss which is one of the main symptoms of dementia.

It is also used to treat the symptoms of:

Alzheimer's disease
dementia with Lewy bodies
mixed dementia – when you have more than one type of dementia
corticobasal degeneration (CBD)
Memantine does not work for everyone. It is not a cure for dementia and your symptoms may gradually get worse, even when you're taking it.

How each person responds to memantine will be different. Some people find it helps with their symptoms a lot. For others, it might seem like it's not working, but it could be preventing symptoms from getting worse.

Memantine is available on prescription only. It comes as tablets, including soluble tablets that you dissolve in water and swallow as a drink, tablets that melt in your mouth, and as a liquid that you swallow.

Key facts
Memantine is not a cure for dementia but it can help with symptoms like being forgetful, feeling confused or feeling anxious.
The most common side effects of memantine are feeling sleepy or dizzy, headaches, constipation and shortness of breath.
It can take up to 3 months for memantine to work fully, but it works differently for everyone.
You can take memantine with or without food.
Your doctor may increase your dose slowly for several weeks after starting. This helps to reduce any side effects.


About mesalazine
-Brand names: Asacol, Mezavant, Octasa, Pentasa, Salofalk, Zintasa
Mesalazine is used to treat ulcerative colitis, Crohn's disease and other types of inflammatory bowel disease.

Mesalazine works by helping to reduce swelling (inflammation). It can also help with healing.

Some people take mesalazine together with steroids to improve their symptoms.

Mesalazine is only available on prescription. It comes as:

tablets
granules
rectal foam
suppositories
enemas
Key facts
Different types and brands of mesalazine tablets and granules work on different parts of your gut. Rectal foam, suppositories or enemas are prescribed for the lower part of your gut. If you find one that works for you, it’s usually best to stick to the same one
You’ll usually need blood tests, liver tests and kidney tests before you start treatment with mesalazine, and then regular monitoring tests.
Mesalazine starts working straight away, but it may take up to a few months to work fully.
Common side effects of mesalazine include stomach pain, indigestion, farting (flatulence), and feeling or being sick,
Drink plenty of fluids, such as water, while you’re taking or using mesalazine to help prevent kidney problems.

About metformin
Metformin is a medicine used to treat type 2 diabetes and gestational diabetes. It's also used to help prevent type 2 diabetes if you're at high risk of developing it.

Type 2 diabetes is a condition where the body does not make enough insulin, or the insulin that it makes does not work properly. This can cause high blood sugar levels (hyperglycaemia).

Metformin lowers your blood sugar levels by improving the way your body handles insulin.

It's usually prescribed for diabetes when diet and exercise alone have not been enough to control your blood sugar levels.

Metformin is also used to improve fertility if you have polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), a condition that affects how the ovaries work. It may also be used to manage other symptoms of PCOS, but it is not officially approved to be used in this way.

Metformin treats PCOS by lowering insulin and blood sugar levels. This can also improve ovulation and encourage regular periods, even if you do not have diabetes.

Metformin is available on prescription as tablets, as a liquid that you swallow and as sachets of powder that you dissolve in a drink.

Key facts
Not everyone gets diabetes symptoms, so taking metformin may not make you feel any different. That does not mean it is not working, so keep on taking it.
It's best to take metformin with a meal to reduce the side effects.
The most common side effects are feeling and being sick, diarrhoea, stomach ache and loss of appetite. Vitamin B12 deficiency is also a common side effect of taking metformin in higher doses or for long periods.
Metformin does not cause weight gain, unlike some other diabetes medicines.
If you have diabetes, you can get free prescriptions for all of your medicines, not just your diabetes ones. You'll need to have a medical exemption certificate.

1. About methadone
Methadone is a man-made opioid (also known as an opiate). Other opioids include codeine, morphine, fentanyl and diamorphine (heroin).

Methadone is used to help you stop taking heroin. It reduces your withdrawal symptoms, such as shaking, shivering and other flu-like symptoms. It also helps stop cravings.

There are 2 main approaches to stopping heroin:

maintenance therapy – where you switch from heroin to a heroin substitute like methadone, then stay on a stable dose of the substitute. You will usually take this long term
detox (detoxification) – where you switch from heroin to a substitute like methadone, before gradually withdrawing from the substitute so you're completely free from both
Some people start taking methadone for maintenance therapy. However many of them go on to detox and become free of heroin and methadone.

Methadone is available on prescription only.

If you're having treatment for heroin addiction (dependence), methadone usually comes as a green liquid. You'll get your prescription from your GP or local drug treatment service.

Methadone is also used for end of life care and severe pain. This is usually prescribed by a pain specialist and comes as tablets or injections.

Information:
If you take heroin and want to stop, you can ask a GP or local drug treatment service for help with heroin addiction. You're entitled to the same confidential NHS care as anyone else.

Find your local drug treatment service

2. Key facts
To get methadone for drug dependence you need to get in touch with your GP or local drug treatment service. You'll have a named key worker.
The most common side effects of methadone are constipation, feeling sick, and feeling cold and sweaty.
It's best to avoid alcohol while taking methadone, as it can cause very serious side effects. For this reason it's important to tell your prescriber how much you drink.
You’ll usually have a urine or saliva test every few weeks at your GP surgery or local drug treatment service. This is to check for heroin, heroin substitutes and other drugs.
Methadone is addictive, like all opioids. If you are taking it to detox, your treatment plan will include details for gradually reducing then stopping your dose.

About methotrexate
-Brand names: Jylamvo, Maxtrex, Methofill, Metoject, Nordimet, Zlatal
Methotrexate is a type of medicine called an immunosuppressant. It slows down your body's immune system and helps reduce swelling (inflammation).

It's used to treat inflammatory conditions, including:

rheumatoid arthritis
psoriasis (including psoriatic arthritis)
Crohn's disease
It can also be prescribed for cancer.

Methotrexate is available on prescription only.

It comes as tablets, a liquid that you swallow, and pre-filled injection pens or syringes that you inject into your skin. Your specialist doctor may recommend injections if the tablets or liquid are not working for you.

It can also be given as an injection to treat some types of cancer. This is usually done in hospital.

Key facts
For conditions such as psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis and Crohn's disease, you'll take methotrexate once a week. It's important to take it on the same day each week.
You'll get a patient card to record the details of your weekly dose and the day you take it. Keep this with you and show it to any healthcare staff involved in your care. You'll also usually get a booklet to record how much you take and your blood test results.
Taking methotrexate can mean you're more likely to get infections. Ask your doctor for urgent advice if you get an infection, such as COVID-19, or if you've been in contact with anyone who has chickenpox or shingles while taking methotrexate.
It's important to have any vaccinations when you're invited. Tell the person giving the vaccine that you take methotrexate, to make sure the vaccine is suitable for you.
It's best to avoid too much caffeine, and foods that can cause an infection such as unpasteurised milk and cheeses. If you're taking high doses, check with your doctor that you can drink alcohol.

About methylphenidate for adults
-Brand names: Ritalin, Concerta, Delmosart, Equasym, Medikinet
Methylphenidate is used to treat attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). It's also sometimes used to treat narcolepsy.

Methylphenidate belongs to a group of medicines called stimulants. They work by increasing activity in the brain, particularly in areas that help control attention and behaviour.

It comes as standard tablets. It also comes as slow release tablets and capsules which release the medicine into your body gradually. If your medicine says modified release or sustained release on the packet, this means that they are also slow release.

Methylphenidate is available on prescription only.

Find out more about methylphenidate for children 17 years old and under.

Key facts
Methylphenidate is a controlled drug, which means that you may have to prove your identity when collecting your prescription. You also have to collect your prescription within 28 days.
You'll usually take standard tablets 2 to 3 times a day. If you're taking slow release methylphenidate, you'll usually take it once a day.
Side effects can include headaches and sleep problems.
It usually takes a few weeks for methylphenidate to work fully. It can take time to find the right type and dose. Once you do, it should start to work within 30 to 60 minutes of taking it.
It's best to stick to the same brand of methylphenidate. Different brands work differently in how they release the medicine into your body, and this can affect how they work to manage your symptoms.
Do not stop taking methylphenidate suddenly without speaking to your doctor.


About methylphenidate for children
-Brand names: Ritalin, Concerta, Medikinet, Delmosart, Equasym
Methylphenidate is used to treat children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). It helps with hyperactivity and impulsive behaviour, and allows them to concentrate better.

It is also used to treat adults with ADHD or narcolepsy (a sleep disorder).

Methylphenidate belongs to a group of medicines called stimulants. They work by increasing activity in the brain, particularly in areas that help control attention and behaviour.

Methylphenidate is only available on prescription.

It comes as standard tablets, and slow release tablets and capsules.

Although standard tablets are sometimes called immediate release, they can still take a while to start working.

Slow release methylphenidate tablets and capsules are sometimes called modified release. These tablets and capsules let the medicine pass into your child's body gradually.

Some children may need to take both slow release and standard methylphenidate tablets or capsules to help treat their ADHD.

Find out more about methylphenidate for adults.

Key facts
Methylphenidate is a controlled drug. This means you may have to prove your identity when collecting your child's prescription. Collect the prescription within 28 days.
If your child takes slow release methylphenidate tablets or capsules, give it to them once a day. If they take standard tablets, your doctor may recommend giving it up to 3 times a day.
It may take a few weeks to work fully. Once your child is on the right dose and type, it should start to work within 30 to 60 minutes of them taking it.
It's best to stick to the same brand, particularly if your child has slow release tablets or capsules. Different brands of methylphenidate work differently in how they release the medicine into the body, and this can affect how they work to manage your child's symptoms.
Do not stop giving your child methylphenidate suddenly. If you want them to stop taking it, speak to their doctor first.

About metoclopramide
-Brand name: Maxolon
Metoclopramide is an anti-sickness medicine (known as an antiemetic). It's used to help stop you feeling or being sick (nausea or vomiting) including:

after radiotherapy or chemotherapy (treatment for cancer)
sickness you may get with a migraine
if you've had an operation
at the end of life (palliative care)
Metoclopramide comes as tablets or a liquid that you swallow. It can also be given as an injection, but this is usually given in hospital or by a member of a care team visiting you at home.

It's only available on prescription.

For migraines, you can also get metoclopramide combined with the painkillers aspirin (brand name Migramax) or paracetamol (brand name Paramax). These are both prescription only.

Key facts
You'll usually only take metoclopramide for a short time (up to 5 days).
The most common side effects are feeling sleepy (drowsy) and diarrhoea.
Avoid drinking alcohol with metoclopramide. It will make you feel more sleepy.
Metoclopramide tablets and liquid usually start to work after 30 to 60 minutes.


About metoprolol
Metoprolol belongs to a group of medicines called beta blockers.

It's used to:

treat high blood pressure (hypertension)
treat conditions that cause an irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia)
help prevent future heart disease, heart attacks and strokes
help prevent chest pain caused by angina
prevent migraines
reduce your symptoms if you have too much thyroid hormone in your body (thyrotoxicosis). You'll usually take it together with other medicines to treat your symptoms
Metoprolol is only available on prescription and it comes as tablets. It can also be given by injection, but this is usually done in hospital.

Key facts
Metoprolol slows down your heart rate and makes it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body.
Your doctor may advise you to take your very first dose before bedtime as it can make you feel dizzy. If you do not feel dizzy after having your first dose, take metoprolol in the morning.
Metoprolol is usually taken once or twice a day, but sometimes it's prescribed to be taken up to 4 times a day.
The main side effects of metoprolol are headaches and feeling sick, dizzy or tired. These are usually mild and only last for a short time.
If you're due to have surgery which involves being put to sleep (having a general anaesthetic), tell your doctor. Metoprolol can lower your blood pressure too much when used with some anaesthetics.

About metronidazole
Metronidazole is an antibiotic.

It's used to treat skin infections, rosacea and mouth infections, including infected gums and dental abscesses. It's also used to treat conditions such as bacterial vaginosis and pelvic inflammatory disease.

It's also used for infected insect bites, skin ulcers, bed sores and wounds, and to treat and prevent bacterial and parasitic infections.

Metronidazole is only available on prescription.

It comes as tablets, gel, vaginal gel, cream, a liquid you drink or a suppository which is a medicine that you push gently into your anus (bottom). It's also given by injection, but this is usually only done in hospital.

Key facts
The most common side effects of metronidazole tablets, liquid, suppositories or vaginal gel are feeling sick (nausea) or being sick (vomiting), diarrhoea, and a slight metallic taste in your mouth.
It's unusual to have any side effects from metronidazole cream or gel.
Do not drink alcohol while taking a course of metronidazole tablets, liquid, suppositories or vaginal gel, or for 2 days after finishing treatment. Alcohol can cause side effects such as feeling and being sick, stomach pain, hot flushes, difficulty breathing, a pounding heartbeat (palpitations) and headaches.
For most infections, you'll start to feel better in a few days, but for some it may take longer. When treating rosacea, you may only notice a difference after several weeks.
It's important to take metronidazole as your doctor tells you, and finish your full course of treatment.

About mirabegron
-Brand name: Betmiga
Mirabegron is a medicine that eases the symptoms of an overactive bladder. It does not treat your condition.

It helps with symptoms such as:

a sudden and urgent need to pee (urinary urgency)
needing to pee more often than usual (urinary frequency)
wetting yourself if you cannot make it to the toilet in time (urinary incontinence)
Mirabegron works by relaxing the muscles around your bladder. This means your bladder can hold more liquid and you will not need to pee as often or as urgently.

This medicine is only available on prescription.

It comes as slow-release tablets (sometimes called modified release or prolonged release). This means the tablets release mirabegron slowly and evenly throughout the day.

Key facts
Mirabegron starts to work within a few hours but it can take several weeks to work fully.
You'll usually take mirabegron once a day.
Common side effects include urinary tract infections (UTIs) and a fast heartbeat.
Your doctor may recommend mirabegron if other medicines for overactive bladder have not helped or are not suitable for you.
You'll usually take this medicine long term to help keep your symptoms under control.


About mirtazapine
Mirtazapine is an antidepressant medicine. It's used to treat depression and sometimes obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) and anxiety.

It works by increasing the amount of mood-enhancing chemicals called noradrenaline and serotonin in your brain.

Mirtazapine is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets, tablets that dissolve in your mouth or as a liquid that you swallow.

Key facts
Mirtazapine usually takes about 4 to 6 weeks to work.
Common side effects include headaches, dry mouth and feeling sick. They're usually mild and go away after a couple of weeks.
If you and your doctor decide to take you off mirtazapine, your doctor will probably recommend reducing your dose gradually to help prevent extra side effects.
Mirtazapine is not a sleeping tablet but it can make you feel sleepy. This can be helpful if you have depression and difficulties getting to sleep.


About molnupiravir
Molnupiravir is an antiviral medicine that works by stopping the virus that causes COVID-19 from growing and spreading.

It's used to treat early COVID-19 infection and help to prevent more severe symptoms.

Molnupiravir is only available on prescription and comes as capsules. You'll need to start taking the capsules as soon as possible after you have tested positive for COVID-19 and within 5 days of your symptoms starting.

You will only be eligible to have the medicine if you're in the highest risk group.

If you are eligible for COVID-19 treatment you will usually be offered Paxlovid or remdesivir, before molnupiravir.

If you have tested positive for COVID-19 and are eligible, call your GP, NHS 111 or hospital specialist as soon as possible. This is so they can consider referring you for an assessment for COVID-19 treatment.

Find about more about how to get treatment for COVID-19.

Key facts
You will take 4 molnupiravir capsules twice a day for 5 days. Even if you start to feel better it's important that you complete the course.
It's important that you start taking molnupiravir within 5 days of getting COVID-19 symptoms.
Molnupiravir starts working very soon after taking it.
Common side effects of molnupiravir include feeling dizzy and headaches. If you feel dizzy, do not drive, cycle or use tools or machinery.
Molnupiravir is not recommended during pregnancy. It's important to use reliable contraception while taking molnupiravir and for 4 days after your last dose.


About mometasone for skin
-Brand name: Elocon
Mometasone is used to treat the itching, swollen and irritated skin you may get if you have eczema (different types, including atopic dermatitis and seborrheic dermatitis) or psoriasis.

Mometasone skin treatments are a type of medicine known as a steroid (or corticosteroid). They're not the same as anabolic steroids.

Mometasone for skin does not cure conditions like eczema but it reduces the swelling (inflammation) in your skin to help manage your symptoms.

Mometasone skin treatments come as a cream, ointment or scalp lotion.

It's stronger than some other treatments and is usually prescribed when milder steroids, like hydrocortisone, have not worked.

Mometasone skin treatments are available on prescription only.

Mometasone also comes as an inhaler to treat asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and a nasal spray for allergic rhinitis, hay fever and nasal polyps.

Key facts
It's important to follow the instructions when using a steroid skin treatment. This helps to avoid side effects.
Only use a mometasone skin treatment if your doctor prescribes it for you. Do not use someone else's medicine.
Only use mometasone on your face if your doctor says it's OK.
Mometasone skin treatments will not help with conditions such as acne or rosacea.
Only use mometasone on large areas of your body or for long periods of time if your doctor says it's OK. If you use mometasone skin treatments for a long time your doctor might advise you to reduce your dose gradually to avoid withdrawal reactions.
Mometasone should not be used on children for more than 5 days, unless a doctor says it's OK.
You may get a blue steroid treatment card if your doctor has prescribed a very high dose of mometasone skin treatment to control your symptoms. Show this card to your doctor or dentist before any treatment, so they know you're using it. You may also need to carry a red steroid emergency card (for adults) or an adrenal insufficiency card (for children). Ask your pharmacist or doctor about both of these.


About mometasone inhalers
-Brand name: Asmanex
Mometasone is a medicine used to treat asthma.

It's called a preventer inhaler because it helps prevent you from getting symptoms. It comes as a twisthaler type of inhaler.

Some inhalers contain mometasone mixed with other medicines that help your breathing (bronchodilators). They are Breezehalers which are a different type of inhaler (brand names Atectura and Enerzair).

Mometasone is a type of medicine known as a steroid (or corticosteroid). Steroids closely copy the effects of natural hormones produced in your adrenal glands. They're not the same as anabolic steroids.

Mometasone inhalers are only available on prescription.

Mometasone also comes as:

a cream, ointment or scalp lotion for eczema and psoriasis
a nose spray (nasal spray) for allergic rhinitis, hay fever and nasal polyps
Key facts
Mometasone inhalers do not work straight away. You'll need to use your mometasone inhaler every day for it to work, even if you do not have any symptoms.
You'll usually be given another inhaler called a reliever to relieve symptoms when you get them.
Common side effects include a dry or sore throat and oral thrush.
It's important to rinse your mouth or brush your teeth after using a steroid inhaler. This is to prevent infections and a sore mouth.
Using mometasone inhalers can mean you're more likely to get infections. Tell your doctor if you get an infection, such as COVID-19, or if you come into contact with anyone who has shingles, chickenpox or measles. These infections can make you very ill. This is particularly important for children.
You may get a blue steroid treatment card if you need high doses of mometasone to control your symptoms. Show this card to your doctor or dentist before any treatment, so they know you're taking it. You may also need to carry a red steroid emergency card. Ask your pharmacist or doctor about both of these.


About mometasone nasal spray
-Brand names: Clarinaze, Nasonex
Mometasone nasal (nose) spray is used to treat cold-like symptoms caused by allergic rhinitis. This is swelling (inflammation) of the inside of the nose that can be caused by allergies like hay fever. It's also used to treat nasal polyps (painless, soft growths inside the nose).

Mometasone is a type of medicine known as a steroid (or corticosteroid). Corticosteroids are a copy of a hormone that your body makes naturally. They're not the same as anabolic steroids.

It works on your immune system to reduce the symptoms of inflammatory conditions and allergic reactions, such as redness, swelling and itching.

For adults, mometasone nasal spray is available on prescription, or from pharmacies where it's often sold as Clarinaze. For children aged 3 to 17 years old, mometasone nasal spray is only available on prescription.

Ryaltris, another prescription-only nasal spray, contains mometasone mixed with an antihistamine.

Mometasone also comes as:

a cream, ointment or scalp lotion for eczema and psoriasis
an inhaler (puffer) for asthma
Key facts
You'll need to use mometasone nasal spray regularly for it to work, and it may take a few days or up to several weeks to work fully. If you're using it for nasal polyps, it may take up to 2 months to get better.
If you're using it for hay fever, start a couple of weeks before the hay fever season begins.
The most common side effects are an unpleasant smell, a dry or sore nose or throat, and nose bleeds.
You may get a blue steroid treatment card if your doctor has prescribed a very high dose of mometasone nasal spray to control your symptoms. Show this card to your doctor or dentist before any treatment, so they know you're using it. You may also need to carry a red steroid emergency card (for adults) or an adrenal insufficiency card (for children). Ask your pharmacist or doctor.


About montelukast
-Brand name: Singulair
Montelukast is used to prevent the symptoms of asthma. It's usually prescribed when asthma is mild and can stop it from getting worse.

It can also help people with asthma who have breathing difficulties when they exercise (exercise-induced asthma) and seasonal allergies, such as sneezing, itchiness and a blocked or runny nose (allergic rhinitis).

Montelukast is sometimes given to people without asthma to treat hives (urticaria) that last for more than 6 weeks.

It's only available on prescription. It comes as tablets or granules.

Important
Do not use montelukast to treat an asthma attack. Always use your reliever inhaler.

Key facts
Montelukast helps stop your airways from narrowing (caused by inflammation). This makes breathing easier and prevents asthma attacks.
Most people take montelukast once a day in the evening.
If you take it for asthma, it's important to take it even when you have no symptoms.
You'll use montelukast alongside your inhalers or other asthma medicine.
Some common side effects include headaches and feeling or being sick.
Less common side effects include mood changes such as depression and anxiety, sleep problems such as nightmares, and changes in your behaviour such as aggression. Speak to your doctor as soon as possible if you notice any of these side effects.


About morphine
Morphine is a strong painkiller. It's used to treat severe pain, for example after an operation or a serious injury, or pain from cancer or a heart attack.

It's also used for other types of long-standing pain when weaker painkillers no longer work.

Morphine is available only on prescription. It comes as tablets, capsules, granules that you dissolve in water, a liquid to swallow or an injection. Morphine injections are usually only done in hospital.

Key facts
Morphine works by blocking pain signals from travelling along the nerves to the brain.
The most common side effects of morphine are constipation, feeling sick and sleepiness.
It's possible to become addicted to morphine, but your doctor will explain how to reduce the risks of becoming addicted.
It may be best not to drink alcohol while taking morphine as you're more likely to get side effects like feeling sleepy.
Morphine is a controlled medicine. When you collect it your pharmacist will ask for proof of your identity such as your passport or driving licence. You'll also be asked to sign the back of your prescription, to confirm that you've received it.

About naproxen
Naproxen is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID). It reduces swelling (inflammation) and pain in joints and muscles.

It's used to treat:

rheumatoid arthritis
osteoarthritis
gout
period pain
muscle and bone disorders, such as back pain and sprains and strains
Naproxen is available on prescription as tablets or as a liquid that you swallow.

Key facts
Take naproxen with or just after a meal or snack.
Take the lowest dose of naproxen for the shortest time to control your symptoms.
The most common side effects of naproxen are confusion, headache, ringing in the ears, changes in vision, tiredness, drowsiness, dizziness and rashes.
For strains and sprains, some doctors recommend waiting 48 hours before taking naproxen because it may slow down healing. If you're unsure, speak to a doctor.
If you're taking naproxen for a long time or at risk of getting a stomach ulcer, your doctor may prescribe a medicine, such as omeprazole or lansoprazole, to protect your stomach.



About nefopam
-Brand name: Acupan
Nefopam is a painkiller. It treats moderate pain, for example after an operation or a serious injury, dental pain, joint pain and muscle pain, or pain from cancer.

You can also take nefopam for other types of long-term pain when weaker painkillers no longer work.

Nefopam is available on prescription only. It comes as tablets.

Key facts
Nefopam is usually prescribed when other painkillers such as paracetamol or anti-inflammatories such as ibuprofen or naproxen do not help your pain.
Your pain should start to improve 1 to 2 hours after taking the tablets.
The most common side effects of nefopam include feeling sick or dizzy. Rarely, it might colour your pee pink, but this is harmless and does not last long.
If nefopam makes you feel sleepy or dizzy, do not drive, ride a bike, or use tools or machinery until you feel better.
It's possible to become addicted to nefopam if you take it for a long time. It's best to take the lowest dose for the shortest time to control your symptoms.



About nicorandil
Nicorandil is a medicine used to treat and reduce chest pain caused by angina.

It works by relaxing and widening your blood vessels and increasing the blood and oxygen supply to your heart.

Your doctor will usually prescribe nicorandil when other heart medicines have not worked or are not suitable for you.

This medicine is only available on prescription and comes as tablets.

Key facts
Taking nicorandil regularly can reduce the risk of further heart conditions.
Nicorandil starts to work after about 1 hour, but it usually takes about 4 to 5 days for it to fully take effect.
It may make you feel dizzy, especially when you first start taking it or after taking a bigger dose. If this happens, do not drive a car, ride a bike, or use tools or machinery until you feel better.
Do not take nicorandil while you are taking medicine for erection problems (erectile dysfunction). This mix can cause a serious drop in blood pressure.
Do not use salt substitutes such as Lo-Salt while taking nicorandil. This is because they're high in potassium.



About nifedipine
Nifedipine is a calcium channel blocker medicine used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension).

If you have high blood pressure, taking nifedipine helps to prevent future heart disease, heart attacks and strokes.

Nifedipine is also used to prevent chest pain caused by angina. Occasionally, it's used to treat Raynaud's phenomenon and chilblains.

Nifedipine is only available on prescription.

It comes as tablets or capsules. It also comes as a liquid or drops to swallow.

Key facts
Nifedipine works by lowering your blood pressure and making it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body.
It starts to work on the day you start taking it, but it may take a couple of weeks to fully take effect. If you have high blood pressure, you may not have any symptoms, so nifedipine may not make you feel any different. But still continue to take it because it is still working.
The most common side effects include headaches, flushing, constipation, a general feeling of being unwell, and swollen ankles. These usually get better after a few days of treatment.
Avoid grapefruit and grapefruit juice while you're taking nifedipine. It can cause side effects or make them worse.
Nifedipine is also called by the brand names Tensipine and Valni.

About nitrofurantoin
Nitrofurantoin is an antibiotic. It's used to treat and prevent lower urinary tract infections (UTIs), such as cystitis.

When you take nitrofurantoin, your body quickly filters it out of your blood and into your pee. This is useful if you have a urinary tract infection because it means the medicine is concentrated at the site of infection. But it means nitrofurantoin will not work for any other types of infection.

Nitrofurantoin is available on prescription. It comes as capsules, tablets and a liquid that you swallow.

Key facts
The most common side effect of nitrofurantoin is an upset stomach. Taking this medicine with or straight after food will help prevent this.
You'll feel better within a few days for most infections.
You can drink alcohol while taking nitrofurantoin.
Nitrofurantoin may turn your pee dark yellow or brown. This is normal. Your pee will return to its usual colour after you finish taking the medicine.
It's important to complete your course of nitrofurantoin, even if you feel better, to stop your infection coming back.


About nortriptyline
Nortriptyline is an antidepressant medicine that's used to treat depression, but can also be used to treat nerve pain.

It's thought that nortriptyline works by increasing a chemical called serotonin in the brain. This helps to improve your mood.

For pain relief, it works by changing the way your nerves receive pain signals, so your pain goes away.

Nortriptyline is available on prescription. It comes as tablets and as a liquid that you swallow.

Key facts
If you take nortriptyline to treat nerve pain, it usually takes a week or so for pain to begin to get better.
If you take nortriptyline for depression, it can take 4 to 6 weeks to work fully.
Common side effects include a dry mouth and constipation. They're usually mild and go away after a couple of weeks.
Nortriptyline can make you feel sleepy, so if you take it once a day it's best to take it in the evening or before you go to bed.
If you want to stop taking nortriptyline, your doctor will reduce your dose gradually to help prevent withdrawal side effects such as headache, muscle pain, or feeling sick or tired.


Headaches
Most headaches go away on their own and are not a sign of something more serious.

How you can ease headaches yourself
Headaches can last 30 minutes, several hours, or sometimes several days.

Do
drink plenty of water

get plenty of rest if you also have a cold or the flu

try to relax – stress can make headaches worse

take paracetamol or ibuprofen

try to stay at home and avoid contact with other people if you also have a high temperature or you do not feel well enough to do your normal activities

Don’t
do not drink alcohol

do not skip meals (even if you might not feel like eating anything)

do not sleep more than you usually would – it can make the headache worse

do not strain your eyes for a long time – for example, by looking at a screen

Non-urgent advice:See a GP if:
your headache keeps coming back
painkillers do not help and your headache gets worse
you have a bad throbbing pain at the front or side of your head – it could be a migraine or, more rarely, a cluster headache
you feel sick, vomit and find light or noise painful
you regularly get headaches before or during your period
Urgent advice:Get an urgent GP appointment or call 111 if:
You or your child has a severe headache and:

jaw pain when eating
blurred or double vision
a sore scalp
other symptoms, such as numbness or weakness in the arms or legs
Also get an urgent GP appointment or call 111 if your child is under 12 and has any 1 of the following:

a headache that wakes them at night
a headache when they wake up in the morning
a headache that gets progressively worse
a headache triggered or made worse by coughing, sneezing or bending down
a headache with vomiting
a headache with a squint (where the eyes point in different directions) or an inability to look upward
You can call 111 or get help from 111 online.

Immediate action required:Call 999 or go to A&E if you or your child:
has a head injury – for example, from a fall or accident
has a headache that came on suddenly and is extremely painful
You or your child has an extremely painful headache and:

sudden problems speaking or remembering things
loss of vision
feel drowsy or confused
has a very high temperature and symptoms of meningitis
the white part of the eye is red
Also call 999 or go to A&E if your child is under 12 and has any 1 of the following:

a headache with vision problems or difficulty speaking, swallowing, balancing or walking
a headache with drowsiness or a persistent lack of energy
a headache that starts within 5 days of a head injury
Information:
Do not drive to A&E. Ask someone to drive you or call 999 and ask for an ambulance.

Bring any medicines you take with you.

What can cause headaches
Common causes of headaches include:

having a cold or flu
stress
drinking too much alcohol
bad posture
eyesight problems
not eating regular meals
not drinking enough fluids (dehydration)
taking too many painkillers
having your period or during menopause (hormone headache)
Keeping a headache diary might help you work out what triggers your headaches.



About nystatin
-Brand name: Nystan
Nystatin is an antifungal medicine. It's used to treat or prevent infections caused by a fungus or yeast. These include:

oral thrush (mouth thrush)
skin infections
Nystatin kills the fungus and gets rid of the infection. It can also be used to stop you getting an infection.

Nystatin is only available on prescription.

It comes as a liquid (suspension) that you swirl around your mouth and then swallow.

It also comes mixed with steroids, antiseptics or antibacterials as a cream or ointment. Brand names for creams and ointments containing nystatin include Trimovate, Timodine, Nystaform and Nystaform HC.

Key facts
Nystatin liquid, cream or ointment usually starts to work after 2 days.
You usually take nystatin liquid 4 times a day after meals and before bedtime. You usually use nystatin cream or ointment 2 or 3 times a day.
It's important not to eat or drink for 30 minutes after taking the liquid.
Keep taking or using nystatin liquid for 2 days after your condition is better. This will help to stop it coming back again.
Side effects of nystatin liquid can include diarrhoea and feeling or being sick (nausea or vomiting).


About oestrogen tablets, patches, gel and spray
-Brand names: Oestrogel, Evorel, Sandrena, Lenzetto, Estradot, Progynova
Oestrogen is used as a type of hormone replacement therapy (HRT). The type of oestrogen most commonly used in HRT is known as estradiol.

It's used to treat symptoms of the menopause. It also helps prevent weakening bones (osteoporosis) which is common after the menopause.

Menopause is when your periods stop due to lower hormone levels. It usually affects women between the ages of 45 and 55, but it can happen earlier. It affects anyone who has periods.

The fall in the amount of oestrogen your body produces can cause symptoms including hot flushes, low mood and vaginal dryness or irritation. Taking oestrogen as a form of HRT restores your levels of oestrogen and helps to relieve these symptoms.

Taking oestrogen can thicken your womb lining, which slightly increases the risk of womb cancer. If you still have your womb, you'll need to also take a progestogen medicine to protect your womb, such as Utrogestan (micronised progesterone). Alternatively, you can take a combined medicine that contains both oestrogen and progestogen.

If you've had a hysterectomy to remove your womb you can usually take oestrogen without progestogen.

Oestrogen is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets that you swallow and patches, gels or sprays that you put on your skin.

Brand names include Elleste Solo, Bedol, Progynova and Zumenon tablets, Evorel, Estradot, Estraderm, Femseven and Progynovna patches, Oestrogel and Sandrena gel, and Lenzetto spray.

Other types of oestrogen
This information is about estradiol (oestrogen) tablets, patches, gel and spray. Other types of oestrogen include conjugated oestrogen (brand name Premarin), but this is less commonly used.

There are other HRT medicines that also contain oestrogen. Find out more about:

vaginal oestrogen, for vaginal dryness and irritation
sequential combined HRT (oestrogen and progestogen), for menopause symptoms if you're still having periods
continuous combined HRT (oestrogen and progestogen), for after your periods have stopped
Key facts
You take oestrogen tablets or use the gel or spray every day, at the same time each day. If you're using the patches you'll need to change them once or twice a week.
HRT can take up to 3 months to work fully to improve your symptoms.
Common side effects include headaches, breast tenderness and vaginal bleeding, but these usually improve in the first few months of treatment.
If you feel that the HRT you're taking is not helping your symptoms, talk to a doctor. It can take time to find the right type and dose to suit you.
It's common to take oestrogen for 2 to 5 years, and then try stopping to see if your menopause symptoms have improved. If your symptoms last for longer, your doctor can advise on the benefits and risks of continuing to take it.
It's important to see your doctor at least once a year for a check-up and to review whether you need to keep taking HRT.


About olanzapine
-Brand name: Zyprexa
Olanzapine is a medicine that helps to manage symptoms of mental health conditions such as:

seeing, hearing, feeling or believing things that others do not, feeling unusually suspicious or having muddled thoughts (schizophrenia)
feeling agitated or hyperactive, very excited, elated, or impulsive (mania symptoms of bipolar disorder)
If you have bipolar disorder, olanzapine can also stop your mania symptoms coming back.

It's an antipsychotic medicine that works by affecting chemicals in your brain such as dopamine and serotonin. It does not cure your condition, but it can help with your symptoms.

Olanzapine is only available on prescription.

It comes as tablets, including tablets that dissolve in your mouth (orodispersible tablets), and an injection.

Key facts
Olanzapine does not work straight away. It may take several days, or even weeks, for some of your symptoms to start improving.
Soon after you first start taking olanzapine, before your other symptoms improve, it may make you feel more relaxed and calm.
Common side effects include feeling sleepy, feeling dizzy, and constipation.
It's important to keep taking your medicine even if you feel better, unless your doctor asks you to stop.
It's best not to drink alcohol when you first start taking olanzapine, until you see how the medicine makes you feel. Drinking alcohol with olanzapine can make you feel sleepy or unsteady, and can make your symptoms worse.

About olmesartan
Olmesartan is a medicine used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension).

It lowers your blood pressure and makes it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body.

Treating high blood pressure helps prevent future strokes, heart attacks and kidney problems.

It's only available on prescription and comes as tablets.

Key facts
It usually takes about a week for olmesartan to start reducing high blood pressure. It may take 2 to 8 weeks to take effect fully. The main side effects of olmesartan are feeling dizzy, headaches and flu-like symptoms, but they're usually mild and only last for a short time.
If you're being sick (vomiting) or have severe diarrhoea because of a stomach bug or illness while taking olmesartan, tell your doctor. You may need to stop taking it until you feel better.
If you're going to be put to sleep (have a general anaesthetic) for an operation or dental procedure, tell the doctor or dental surgeon that you're taking olmesartan. General anaesthetics can reduce your blood pressure.
Do not use salt substitutes such as Lo-Salt. This is because they are high in potassium. When mixed with olmesartan, they may make the level of potassium in your blood too high.

About omeprazole
-Brand names: Losec, Losec MUPS, Pyrocalm
Omeprazole reduces the amount of acid your stomach makes. It's widely used to treat indigestion and heartburn, and acid reflux. It's also taken to prevent and treat stomach ulcers.

Omeprazole is a type of medicine called a proton pump inhibitor (PPI). Proton pumps are enzymes in the lining of your stomach that help it make acid to digest food. Omeprazole prevents proton pumps working properly which reduces the amount of acid the stomach makes.

Sometimes, omeprazole is taken for a rare condition caused by a tumour in the pancreas or gut called Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.

Omeprazole comes as capsules, tablets and as a liquid that you swallow.

All types of omeprazole are available on prescription. You can buy 20mg tablets from pharmacies and supermarkets.

Key facts
Omeprazole starts to work within 2 to 3 days, but it may take up to 4 weeks for it to work fully.
You’ll usually take omeprazole once a day, in the morning. For Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, you can take it twice a day – in the morning and in the evening.
Common side effects include headaches, diarrhoea and stomach pain. These tend to be mild and go away when you stop taking the medicine.
If you buy omeprazole from a pharmacy or supermarket to treat yourself, do not take it for longer than 2 weeks without checking with a doctor.
Alcohol can make your stomach produce more acid than normal. This irritates the stomach lining and can make your symptoms worse. It's best to avoid alcohol if possible while you're taking omeprazole.

About oxybutynin
-Brand names: Aspire, Ditropan, Kentera
Oxybutynin is a medicine used to treat symptoms of an overactive bladder. These can include:

a sudden and urgent need to pee (urinary urgency)
needing to pee more often than usual (urinary frequency)
wetting yourself if you cannot make it to the toilet in time (urinary incontinence)
It's also used to treat bedwetting in children (nocturnal enuresis).

Oxybutynin works by relaxing the muscles in your bladder. This means your bladder can hold more liquid and you do not need to pee as often or as urgently.

Oxybutynin is only available on prescription.

It comes as tablets, slow-release tablets (also called prolonged release), a liquid that you swallow, or patches that you stick to your skin (transdermal patches).

Key facts
Oxybutynin may take 4 weeks or longer to work fully. If your symptoms do not start to improve after 1 to 2 weeks, talk to your doctor.
Your doctor will do a review after 4 weeks to check oxybutynin is working and is still the best treatment for you. They'll also check that your treatment is still needed every 6 to 12 months.
Common side effects of oxybutynin include a dry mouth, blurred vision, constipation and feeling dizzy or sleepy.
Do not drive a car or ride a bike if oxybutynin makes you sleepy, gives you blurred vision, or makes you feel dizzy, clumsy or unable to concentrate.
It's best not to drink alcohol when you first start taking oxybutynin, as it can make you very sleepy.

About oxycodone
-Brand names: Oxycontin, Oxypro, Longtec, Shortec
Oxycodone is an opioid painkiller. It's used to treat severe pain, for example after an operation or a serious injury, or pain from cancer.

Sometimes it's also used for other types of long-term pain when other painkillers, such as paracetamol, ibuprofen and aspirin, have not worked.

Oxycodone is only available on prescription. It comes as slow-release tablets, standard tablets and capsules, and a liquid that you swallow. It can also be given by injection, but this is usually done in hospital.

Oxycodone liquid, standard tablets, capsules and injections work quickly. They're used for pain which is expected to last for a short time and are often used when you start taking oxycodone, to help find the right dose.

Oxycodone slow-release tablets gradually release the oxycodone into your body over either 12 or 24 hours. They take longer to start working but last longer. They are used for long-term pain.

Sometimes your doctor may prescribe both standard and slow-release oxycodone to manage long-term pain.

Oxycodone is sometimes combined with a medicine called naloxone. It comes as a tablet that is used to prevent certain side effects, such as constipation. Oxycodone with naloxone is known by the brand names Myloxifin, Oxyargin or Targinact.

Key facts
Oxycodone liquid and capsules work in 30 to 60 minutes but wear off after 4 to 6 hours. Slow-release tablets can take up to 1 to 2 days to work fully but the pain relief will last longer.
It's possible to become addicted to oxycodone, but your doctor will explain how to reduce the risks of becoming addicted.
If you need to take oxycodone for more than a few weeks, your treatment plan may include details of how and when to stop taking this medicine.
The most common side effects of oxycodone are constipation, feeling sick and feeling sleepy.
Do not have grapefruit juice while taking oxycodone. It can affect the way your body uses the oxycodone and cause more serious side effects.





1. About pantoprazole
Pantoprazole reduces the amount of acid your stomach makes.

It's used for heartburn, acid reflux and gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) – GORD is when you keep getting acid reflux. It's also taken to prevent and treat stomach ulcers.

Sometimes, pantoprazole is taken for a rare condition caused by a tumour in the pancreas or gut called Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.

Pantoprazole comes as tablets.

All types of pantoprazole are available on prescription. You can also buy lower-strength 20mg tablets from pharmacies for heartburn or acid reflux.

2. Key facts
You'll usually take pantoprazole once a day in the morning.
The most common side effects are headaches and diarrhoea. These tend to be mild and go away when you stop taking the medicine.
You should start to feel better in 2 to 3 days, but it may take up to 4 weeks for pantoprazole to fully control your symptoms.
If you've bought pantoprazole without a prescription and your symptoms do not improve after 2 weeks, see a doctor before taking any more.
Pantoprazole is not usually recommended during pregnancy.

About paracetamol for adults
-Brand names: Disprol, Hedex, Medinol, Panadol
Paracetamol is a common painkiller used to treat aches and pain. It can also be used to reduce a high temperature.

It's available to buy from a pharmacy or shop, but you may be able to get 1g tablets on prescription if you have long-term pain. It comes as tablets, capsules, syrup, powder that you mix with water, or suppositories. The 1g tablets are only available if prescribed by a doctor.

Paracetamol is also available combined with other painkillers and anti-sickness medicines. It is used in a wide range of cold and flu remedies.

For under-16s, find out more about paracetamol for children.

Key facts
Paracetamol can take up to an hour to work.
The usual dose of paracetamol is one or two 500mg tablets at a time, up to 4 times in 24 hours. The maximum dose is eight 500mg tablets in 24 hours.
Do not take paracetamol with other medicines containing paracetamol because there is a risk of overdose.
Paracetamol is safe to take during pregnancy and while breastfeeding, at recommended doses.
It may not be safe for you to drink alcohol with paracetamol if you have certain health conditions, such as liver problems. Check the leaflet that comes with your medicine.

About paracetamol for children
-Brand names: Calpol, Disprol, Hedex, Medinol, Panadol
Paracetamol is a common painkiller for children. It's often used to treat headaches, stomach ache, earache, and cold symptoms. It can also be used to bring down a high temperature (fever).

Paracetamol for children is available as tablets or as a syrup.

Paracetamol also comes as suppositories (medicine that you push gently into your child's bottom). Suppositories are useful to relieve pain and a high temperature in children who find it difficult to swallow tablets or syrup, or who are being sick a lot.

You can give your child a suppository from the age of 3 months.

Paracetamol tablets (including soluble tablets), syrup and suppositories are available on prescription and to buy from shops and pharmacies.

For over-16s, find out more about paracetamol for adults.

Key facts
Paracetamol for children comes in different strengths, including 2 strengths of syrup. The strength and dosage depends on your child's age (and sometimes weight), so always check the instructions carefully.
Your child should start to feel better about 30 minutes after taking tablets or syrup. Suppositories can take up to 60 minutes to work fully.
Do not give your child any other medicines that contain paracetamol. These include some cough and cold medicines, so check the ingredients carefully.
Paracetamol for children is a common medicine, but it can be dangerous if your child takes too much. Be careful to keep it out of your child's reach.
Give paracetamol to your child if they are in pain.
You can give paracetamol to your child if they have a high temperature and they feel distressed or unwell.

About paroxetine
Paroxetine is a type of antidepressant known as a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI).

It's often used to treat depression, and sometimes obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), panic attacks, anxiety or post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

Paroxetine helps many people recover from depression, and it has fewer unwanted effects than older antidepressants.

Paroxetine is available on prescription. It comes as tablets and as a liquid that you swallow.

Key facts
It usually takes 4 to 6 weeks for paroxetine to work fully.
Side effects such as feeling sick or sexual problems are common. They are usually mild and go away after a couple of weeks.
If you and your doctor decide that you should come off paroxetine, your doctor will probably recommend reducing your dose gradually to help prevent extra withdrawal symptoms.
Paroxetine will not change your personality. It will simply help you feel like yourself again.
Some people find that paroxetine affects their concentration. If this happens, it might be best to stop driving, cycling or operating tools or machinery for the first few days until you know how it makes you feel.


About Paxlovid
Paxlovid is an antiviral medicine that works by stopping the virus that causes COVID-19 from growing and spreading in the body.

It's used to treat early COVID-19 infection and help to prevent more severe symptoms.

Paxlovid is a combination of 2 medicines called nirmatrelvir and ritonavir. Nirmatrelvir stops the virus from growing and spreading, and ritonavir helps nirmatrelvir from being broken down in your body long enough to do its job.

It comes as tablets. You'll need to start taking them as soon as possible after you have tested positive for COVID-19 and within 5 days of your symptoms starting.

Paxlovid is only available on prescription. However, you will only be eligible to have the medicine if you're in the highest risk group.

If you test positive for COVID-19 and are eligible, call your GP surgery, NHS 111 or hospital specialist as soon as possible. This is so they can consider referring you for an assessment for COVID-19 treatment.

Find out more about how to get treatments for COVID-19.

Key facts
You will take 2 nirmatrelvir tablets and 1 ritonavir tablet twice a day for 5 days. Even if you start to feel better, it's important that you finish the course.
It's important that you start taking Paxlovid within 5 days of getting COVID-19 symptoms.
Paxlovid starts working soon after taking it.
Side effects include diarrhoea, vomiting and a change in how food and drink tastes.
There are lots of medicines that can affect the way Paxlovid works. Tell your doctor if you're taking any medicines.

About peppermint oil
-Brand names: Apercap, Colomint, ColoPep, Colpermin, Mintec, PepperMinn
Peppermint oil is a type of medicine called an antispasmodic. It helps relieve stomach cramps, bloating and farting (flatulence), particularly if you have irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).

Peppermint oil comes as capsules. It's available on prescription or to buy from a pharmacy or a shop.

Key facts
Peppermint oil works by relaxing the muscle in your bowel. This helps relieve the pain of stomach cramps and eases bloating and farting.
It will start to work within a few hours but it could take up to 1 to 2 weeks to work fully. Keep taking peppermint oil until your symptoms improve.
Leave a gap of at least 2 hours between taking a dose of peppermint oil and taking an indigestion medicine. This allows the peppermint oil capsules to work properly.
Side effects include heartburn and indigestion.
If you buy peppermint oil from a pharmacy or shop, do not take it for longer than 2 weeks without checking with a doctor.

About Pepto-Bismol
-Other brand names: Pepti-Calm
Bismuth subsalicylate is the main ingredient in Pepto-Bismol. This medicine is used for heartburn and acid reflux, indigestion, diarrhoea and feeling sick (nausea).

It works by protecting your stomach and the lower part of your food pipe from stomach acid. It is also a mild antacid, which helps reduce too much stomach acid and eases any discomfort.

Pepto-Bismol comes as tablets and a liquid that you swallow. You can buy it from pharmacies and shops.

Key facts
You can take Pepto-Bismol with or without food.
It should work within 30 to 60 minutes. You can take up to 8 doses in 24 hours.
Speak to a doctor if your symptoms are no better after 2 days.
You're unlikely to get any side effects from Pepto-Bismol if you follow the instructions for taking it.
If you're allergic to aspirin (or any of the ingredients in Pepto-Bismol) check with a pharmacist before taking this medicine.

About perindopril
Perindopril is a medicine used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension) and heart failure. It's also prescribed after a heart attack.

Perindopril helps to reduce the risk of future strokes and heart attacks. It also improves your survival if you're taking it following a heart attack or heart surgery.

This medicine is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets. It also comes as a liquid for people who find it difficult to swallow tablets, but your pharmacist will have to order this for you.

Perindopril is also available as a tablet combined with another blood pressure medicine called indapamide.

Key facts
Perindopril lowers your blood pressure and makes it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body. It starts to work within a few hours, but it may take a few weeks for full effect.
Your very first dose of perindopril may make you feel dizzy, so it's best to take it at bedtime. After that, if you do not feel dizzy, it's best to take perindopril in the morning before breakfast.
Some people get a dry, tickly cough with perindopril. If this happens your doctor might suggest you change to a different medicine.
If you get severe diarrhoea or you're being sick (vomiting) because of a stomach bug or illness, tell your doctor. You may need to stop taking perindopril for a while until you feel better.
Alcohol can increase the effect of perindopril, so that it lowers your blood pressure too much, which can make you feel dizzy or lightheaded. It's best not to drink alcohol until you see how perindopril affects you.
Perindopril can be called perindopril arginine, perindopril erbumine or perindopril tert-butylamine. They all work as well as each other and all contain the same amount of perindopril.


About phenoxymethylpenicillin
Phenoxymethylpenicillin is a type of penicillin antibiotic.

It's used to treat bacterial infections, including ear, chest, throat and skin infections.

It can also be used to prevent infections if you have sickle cell disease, or if you have had chorea (a movement disorder), rheumatic fever, or your spleen removed.

Phenoxymethylpenicillin is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets or as a liquid that you swallow.

Key facts
You'll usually take phenoxymethylpenicillin 4 times a day to treat an infection.
In most cases you'll start to feel better in a few days.
The most common side effects of phenoxymethylpenicillin are feeling sick and diarrhoea.
Some people may have an allergic reaction to antibiotics, especially phenoxymethylpenicillin and other penicillins.
You can drink alcohol while taking phenoxymethylpenicillin.

About phenytoin
Phenytoin is a medicine used to treat epilepsy.

Seizures are bursts of electrical activity in the brain that temporarily affect how it works. Phenytoin slows down these electrical signals to stop seizures.

It can also be used to treat trigeminal neuralgia, a type of nerve pain that affects your face.

Phenytoin can help to relieve nerve pain by slowing down electrical impulses in the nerves and reducing their ability to transmit pain.

Phenytoin is available on prescription. It comes as standard tablets, tablets that can be chewed (Infatabs), capsules and a liquid that you swallow.

Key facts
You'll usually take phenytoin once or twice a day. You can take it with or without food.
The most common side effects are headaches and feeling dizzy.
It takes around 4 weeks for phenytoin to work.
If you have epilepsy, it's best to stay on the same brand of phenytoin, as other brands may not work as well for you. If you take it for trigeminal neuralgia, most people do not have to stay on the same brand.
You may feel sleepy or dizzy when you first start taking phenytoin or the dose is increased. If this happens to you, do not drive, ride a bike or operate machinery until you feel better.
If you have epilepsy, you're entitled to free prescriptions for all of your medicines, not just your epilepsy ones. You'll need a medical exemption certificate from your doctor's surgery.


About pioglitazone
Pioglitazone is a medicine used to treat type 2 diabetes.

Type 2 diabetes is a condition where the body does not make enough insulin, or the insulin that it makes does not work properly. This can cause high blood sugar levels (hyperglycaemia).

Pioglitazone helps to control your blood sugar levels by helping your body make better use of the insulin it produces.

Pioglitazone is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets.

It also comes as tablets containing a mixture of pioglitazone and another diabetes medicine called metformin. This is known by the brand name Competact.

Key facts
You'll usually take pioglitazone once a day. You can take it with or without food.
Pioglitazone takes a few weeks to lower your blood sugar levels. You may not feel any different if you do not have symptoms from your diabetes, but it's important to keep taking it.
After 3 to 6 months, your doctor will check your blood sugar levels to see if pioglitazone is working for you.
Some people find they put on weight when taking pioglitazone. Eating a healthy, balanced diet and regular exercise can help with this.
If you have diabetes, you're entitled to free prescriptions for all of your medicines, not just your diabetes ones.

About pravastatin
Pravastatin is used to lower cholesterol if you've been diagnosed with high blood cholesterol.

It's also taken to prevent heart disease, including heart attacks and strokes.

Pravastatin belongs to a group of medicines called statins.

Your doctor may prescribe pravastatin if you have a family history of heart disease, or a long-term health condition such as type 1 or type 2 diabetes or rheumatoid arthritis.

Pravastatin is available on prescription as tablets.

Key facts
It's unusual to have any side effects from taking pravastatin.
Do not take pravastatin if you are pregnant, trying to get pregnant or breastfeeding.
Take pravastatin even if you feel well, as you will still be getting the benefits. Most people with high cholesterol do not have any symptoms.
If you take your medicine pravastatin regularly, as prescribed, your cholesterol levels should drop within 4 weeks.

About Pre-Exposure Prophylaxis (PrEP)
Pre-Exposure Prophylaxis (PrEP) is used to reduce the risk of getting HIV (human immunodeficiency virus).

PrEP works by stopping HIV from getting into your body and making copies of itself (replicating). You'll only be protected from HIV infection if there are high enough levels of PrEP in your body, so it's important to take it correctly.

PrEP can be used by anyone from a community or group that is most at risk of HIV, or people who have sex with people from those networks.

You may benefit from taking PrEP if:

you're an HIV-negative man having condomless sex with men, and other people who have sex within these networks
you have a partner (or ex-partner) with HIV
your partner (or ex-partner) comes from a country with high rates of HIV
you have condomless sex with a partner(s) and do not know their HIV status
you're a trans or non-binary person and are regularly having condomless sex
you exchange sex for money, drugs, shelter or another reason
you are injecting drugs
Find out more about who is at risk of getting HIV.

Find out more about other at-risk activities.

PrEP comes as tablets that contain 2 medicines called tenofovir disoproxil and emtricitabine. Both medicines are often also used to treat HIV.

You can get PrEP from a health professional at an NHS sexual health clinic.

Key facts
PrEP does not protect you against other sexually transmitted infections (STIs).
Common side effects of PrEP include feeling sick (nausea), diarrhoea, bloating, indigestion, headache, feeling tired or weak and sleeping problems. They usually go away after the first couple of weeks.
If you get stomach side effects while taking PrEP, taking it with or just after food may help.
Most people can take PrEP every day but some people can take it on demand (just before and after sex).
If you take PrEP daily for vaginal/frontal sex, it takes 7 days to give maximum protection. If you take it only when you need it for anal sex, you'll be protected about 2 hours after your first double dose.

About prednisolone tablets and liquid
Prednisolone is a medicine used to treat a wide range of health problems including allergies, blood disorders, skin diseases, inflammation, infections and certain cancers and to prevent organ rejection after a transplant.

It helps by reducing swelling (inflammation) and can also calm down your immune system. This helps autoimmune conditions, like rheumatoid arthritis, where your immune system mistakenly attacks its own tissues.

Prednisolone is a steroid or corticosteroid medicine. Corticosteroids are not the same as anabolic steroids.

Prednisolone is available only on prescription as tablets and as a liquid you swallow. It can also be given by injection but this is usually only done in hospital.

Key facts
It's best to take prednisolone tablets or liquid once a day in the morning so it does not keep you awake.
The most common side effects are problems sleeping, weight gain and indigestion.
Taking prednisolone can make you more likely to get infections. Tell your doctor if you get an infection, such as coronavirus (COVID-19), or if you're exposed to infectious illnesses like chickenpox, shingles or measles.
If you take prednisolone for more than 3 weeks, or you're on a high dose, you'll get a blue steroid card. You may also need to carry a (red) steroid emergency card. Ask your pharmacist or doctor about both of these.
You will need to carry a steroid emergency card if you take prednisolone to treat Addison’s disease, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, other adrenal problems, adrenal insufficiency or hypothalamic or pituitary disorder. Do not stop taking prednisolone if you're taking it for these conditions.
Do not stop taking prednisolone suddenly if you've been on it for more than 3 weeks or have taken high doses (more than 40mg) for more than 1 week. This can cause withdrawal side effects.

1. About pregabalin
Pregabalin is used to treat epilepsy and anxiety.

It's also taken to treat nerve pain. Nerve pain can be caused by different conditions including diabetes and shingles, or an injury.

Pregabalin works in different ways:

in epilepsy it stops seizures by reducing the abnormal electrical activity in the brain
with nerve pain it blocks pain by affecting the pain messages travelling through the brain and down the spine
in anxiety it stops your brain from releasing the chemicals that make you feel anxious
Pregabalin is only available on prescription. It comes as capsules, tablets, or a liquid that you swallow.

2. Key facts
You'll usually take pregabalin 2 or 3 times a day. You can take it with or without food.
Pregabalin is often used for epilepsy, but you can also take it to help with pain or anxiety if you do not have epilepsy.
It takes at least a few weeks for pregabalin to work.
The side effects of pregabalin are usually mild and go away by themselves. The most common ones are feeling sleepy, dizziness and headaches.
If you have epilepsy it's important to take pregabalin regularly. Missing doses could trigger a seizure.


About prochlorperazine
-Brand names: Stemetil, Buccastem
Prochlorperazine is an anti-sickness medicine. It can help stop you feeling or being sick (nausea or vomiting).

You can take prochlorperazine to treat:

sickness in pregnancy
feeling dizzy or a spinning sensation (vertigo)
motion sickness
feeling sick due to migraines
sickness caused by general anaesthetics after surgery
sickness caused by cancer treatment or taking other medicines
problems with balance such as Ménière's disease
Prochlorperazine is occasionally used to treat anxiety.

It comes as tablets that you swallow and tablets that dissolve in your mouth. It can also be given as an injection, but this is usually done in hospital.

Prochlorperazine tablets are available on prescription. You can also buy tablets in a pharmacy without a prescription to treat nausea and vomiting, but only if you've been previously diagnosed with migraines and are 18 years old or over.

Key facts
Prochlorperazine starts to work in around 30 to 60 minutes. If you're taking it for Ménière's disease, it will take a few days to work fully.
Common side effects include feeling sleepy and a dry mouth. They're usually mild and go away by themselves.
You can usually take prochlorperazine when you need it, up to 3 times a day.
Only take prochlorperazine long term if your doctor advises it. If you take it for a long time, stopping suddenly can cause withdrawal symptoms.
It's best not to drink alcohol while taking prochlorperazine. It can increase the chance of side effects, such as feeling sleepy.

About Utrogestan
Utrogestan (micronised progesterone) is a medicine that contains a hormone called progesterone. Progesterone is a type of progestogen that's identical to the hormone your body produces.

Your ovaries produce progesterone and oestrogen until the menopause, when your periods stop. Menopause usually affects women between the ages of 45 and 55, but it can happen earlier. It affects anyone who has periods.

Progesterone is produced during the second half of your menstrual cycle. As you reach menopause, the amount of progesterone and oestrogen that your body produces falls.

Utrogestan is taken along with oestrogen as part of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) to relieve the menopause symptoms you may have when your body produces less of these hormones. Taking progesterone with oestrogen is known as combined HRT.

Oestrogen-based HRT can thicken the womb lining. This slightly increases the risk of womb cancer. Taking progesterone together with oestrogen reduces this risk.

Progesterone stops the womb lining from getting too thick, and when you stop taking it (usually for a few days each month) this causes the womb lining to be shed, like a period, which helps to protect you from womb cancer.

You'll need to take combined HRT if you still have a womb.

Utrogestan is only available on prescription. It comes as capsules that you swallow.

Utrogestan also comes as vaginal capsules but these are only used as part of fertility treatment (IVF).

Key facts
You'll usually take Utrogestan on certain days each month: either 2 capsules every day on days 15 to 26, or 1 capsule every day on days 1 to 25 of your medicine's 28 day cycle. Sometimes you might be advised to take it every day without a break.
HRT can take up to 3 months to fully improve your symptoms.
Common side effects include changes in your periods, breast tenderness and headaches, but these usually improve in the first few months of treatment.
If you feel that the HRT you're taking is not helping your symptoms, talk to a doctor. It can take time to find the right type and dose to suit you.
It's common to take HRT for 2 to 5 years, and then try stopping to see if until your menopause symptoms have improved. If your symptoms last for longer, your doctor can advise on the benefits and risks of continuing to take HRT.
It's important to see your doctor at least once a year for a check-up and to review whether you need to keep taking HRT.


1. About promethazine
Promethazine is an antihistamine medicine that relieves the symptoms of allergies.

It's known as a drowsy (sedating) antihistamine, so it's more likely to make you feel sleepy than other antihistamines.

Promethazine is used for:

short-term sleep problems (insomnia) – including when a cough, cold or itching is keeping you awake at night
allergies, including hay fever and hives (urticaria)
feeling and being sick (vomiting) – due to motion sickness or vertigo
cold symptoms, such as coughing and a runny nose
You can buy promethazine from pharmacies, where it's often sold as Avomine, Phenergan or Sominex. Promethazine is also available on prescription.

It comes as tablets, capsules and a liquid that you swallow.

You can also buy promethazine mixed with other medicines, such as paracetamol, dextromethorphan or pseudoephedrine, to treat coughs and colds or pain.

2. Key facts
Do not drink alcohol while taking promethazine. Alcohol increases the risks of side effects.
To help you sleep, take promethazine 20 minutes before you go to bed. It normally takes about 30 minutes to work.
To prevent motion sickness, take promethazine the night before a long journey or 1 to 2 hours before a short journey.
Common side effects of promethazine include drowsiness, headaches, nightmares and feeling dizzy, restless or confused.
When promethazine is mixed with other medicines, it's also known by the brand names Fedril and Night Nurse.


1. About propranolol
Propranolol belongs to a group of medicines called beta blockers. It's used to treat heart problems, help with some of the symptoms of anxiety and prevent migraines.

If you have a heart problem, you can take propranolol to:

treat high blood pressure
treat conditions that cause an irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia), like atrial fibrillation
help prevent future heart disease, heart attacks and strokes
help prevent chest pain caused by angina
Propranolol can help reduce your symptoms if you have too much thyroid hormone in your body (thyrotoxicosis). You'll usually take it together with medicines to treat an overactive thyroid.

This medicine is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets, slow release capsules, or as a liquid that you swallow.

2. Key facts
Propranolol slows down your heart rate and makes it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body.
It's usually prescribed for high blood pressure and other heart problems, but it can also help with the physical symptoms of anxiety, like sweating and shaking.
Your very first dose of propranolol may make you feel dizzy, so take it at bedtime. After that, if you do not feel dizzy, you can take it in the morning.
The main side effects of propranolol are feeling dizzy or tired, cold hands or feet, difficulties sleeping and nightmares. These side effects are usually mild and short-lived.


About pseudoephedrine
-Brand names: Sudafed, Galpseud, Boots Decongestant, Care Decongestant
Pseudoephedrine is a decongestant that helps you breathe more easily if your nose is stuffy or blocked (nasal congestion). This happens when blood vessels in the cavities in your nose (sinuses) become swollen.

Pseudoephedrine works by reducing this swelling and that helps mucus and air flow more freely.

You can get a blocked or stuffy nose when you have:

a cold
the flu
allergies such as hay fever
a sinus infection (sinusitis)
You can buy pseudoephedrine from pharmacies. It comes as tablets and a liquid that you swallow. You can buy these from a pharmacy in a pack of 12 tablets or 100ml of liquid.

If you need more than this, you'll need a prescription from a doctor.

Pseudoephedrine also comes mixed with other medicines to treat the symptoms of coughs, colds and allergies. These include Benadryl Allergy Relief, Benylin Day & Night and Boots Chesty Cough & Congestion Relief.

Galpseud Plus Linctus is another pseudoephedrine mixture but it comes in a 500ml bottle so you will need a prescription.

Pseudoephedrine mixed with other medicines comes as tablets, capsules and a liquid that you swallow.

Key facts
Pseudoephedrine usually starts to work in 15 to 30 minutes.
Common side effects include feeling sick, headaches and a dry mouth.
Only use pseudoephedrine for a short time, usually less than 7 days. Using it for longer than this could cause side effects.
Pseudoephedrine can raise your blood pressure and your heart rate so it's best not to take it if you have heart problems.
Try to reduce how much caffeine (such as coffee, tea, cola and chocolate) you have. It can increase your heart rate, and you may get side effects such as feeling shaky.

About quetiapine
-Brand names: Atrolak, Biquelle, Seroquel, Sondate, Zaluron
Quetiapine is a medicine that helps with mental health conditions such as:

schizophrenia, where you may see, hear or feel things that are not there or you believe things that are not true, or you feel unusually suspicious or have muddled thoughts
the mania symptoms of bipolar disorder, where your mood changes between feeling highly excited (mania) and very low (depression)
depression in bipolar disorder
depression (quetiapine is only used together with other medicines for depression)
It can help to prevent mania and depression if you have bipolar disorder.

It's an antipsychotic medicine that works by affecting chemicals in your brain such as dopamine and serotonin. It does not cure your condition, but it can help with the symptoms.

Quetiapine is only available on prescription.

It comes as tablets, including slow release tablets (these may have XL in the brand name), and as a liquid that you swallow.

Key facts
Quetiapine does not work straight away. You'll usually start on a low dose. It can take several days or weeks to get to the right dose for you, and for your symptoms to start improving.
You can take quetiapine standard tablets and liquid with or without food. If you're taking the slow release tablets, take them on an empty stomach. This means an hour before food and 2 hours after food.
Common side effects include feeling sleepy, problems with your movement and headaches.
Quetiapine can make you feel more hungry than usual, so you may put on weight. Eating a healthy, balanced diet will help with this.
It's best not to drink alcohol for the first few days of treatment until you see how the medicine affects you.
Do not have grapefruit or grapefruit juice while taking this medicine, as it increases the risk of side effects.

About rabeprazole
Rabeprazole reduces the amount of acid your stomach makes. It's widely used to treat heartburn, acid reflux and gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD). GORD is when you keep getting acid reflux.

Rabeprazole is also taken to prevent and treat stomach ulcers.

Sometimes, it is also prescribed for a rare condition caused by a tumour in the pancreas or gut, called Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.

Rabeprazole is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets.

Key facts
You’ll usually take rabeprazole once a day in the morning.
If you are prescribed a higher dose, you can take it twice a day, in the morning and in the evening. It starts to work within 2 to 3 days, but it may take up to 4 weeks for rabeprazole to work fully.
Common side effects include headaches, diarrhoea, feeling or being sick, constipation, stomach pain. These tend to be mild and go away when you stop taking the medicine.
Rabeprazole is not usually recommended during pregnancy but you may be able to take while breastfeeding if your doctor says it’s OK. Ask your doctor for advice
You can drink alcohol with rabeprazole but it may make your symptoms worse.


About ramipril
Ramipril is a medicine widely used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension) and heart failure. It's also prescribed after a heart attack.

Ramipril helps prevent future strokes, heart attacks and kidney problems. It also improves your survival if you're taking it for heart failure or after a heart attack.

It works by widening your blood vessels and making it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body.

This medicine is available on prescription. It comes as tablets, capsules and as a liquid that you swallow for people who find it difficult to swallow tablets.

Ramipril is also available combined with another blood pressure medicine called felodipine. This combined medicine is called by the brand name Triapin.

Key facts
Ramipril starts to work within a few hours, but it may take a few weeks for full effect.
Your very first dose of ramipril may make you feel dizzy, so it's best to take it at bedtime. After the first dose, if you do not feel dizzy, you can take it at any time of day. Try to take it at the same time each day.
Some people get a dry, tickly cough with ramipril. If this happens your doctor might suggest you change to a different medicine.
If you have severe diarrhoea or you're being sick (vomiting) because of a stomach bug or illness, tell your doctor. You may need to stop taking ramipril for a while until you feel better.
Drinking alcohol can increase the effect of ramipril, so that it lowers your blood pressure too much, which can make you feel dizzy or lightheaded. It's best not to drink alcohol until you see how ramipril affects you.

Ranitidine
Ranitidine is not currently available in the UK or globally. It has been discontinued as a precaution because it may contain a small amount of an impurity that has been linked to an increased risk of cancer in animals. It's not yet known whether it will be available again in future.

Ranitidine is a medicine that reduces the amount of acid your stomach makes. It was used for indigestion, heartburn and acid reflux, gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD – this is when you keep getting acid reflux), and to prevent and treat stomach ulcers.

Talk to your doctor or a pharmacist if you have indigestion, or heartburn and acid reflux. There are similar medicines they can recommend for you if you need treatment.

About risedronate
-Brand names: Actonel, Actonel Once a Week
Risedronate (risedronate sodium) is a type of medicine called a bisphosphonate. It helps your bones stay as strong as possible.

It can help if you have or are at risk of getting a health condition called osteoporosis. This is where your bones get weaker and more likely to break.

Osteoporosis can happen for many reasons, but you're more likely to get it if you're a woman who has been through the menopause or if you take steroids, such as prednisolone, for a long time. Some types of cancer treatment can also increase your risk of getting osteoporosis.

Risedronate can also help people who have Paget's disease of bone. This weakens your bones and they can become deformed. Risedronate helps to reduce these bone changes, reduce pain and make your bones stronger and less likely to break.

Risedronate comes as tablets and is only available on prescription.

Key facts
Most people take risedronate as a weekly tablet, but those with Paget's disease of bone may take it daily.
Risedronate usually starts to work after 2 weeks, but it may take up to 6 months to fully protect your bones, and 3 to 6 months for your symptoms to improve if you're taking it for Paget's disease.
Take risedronate first thing in the morning, at least 30 minutes before you have anything to eat or drink and before you take any other medicines.
Side effects can include constipation, diarrhoea and feeling sick.
Risedronate can sometimes affect your jawbone, so it's important to look after your teeth and have regular dental check-ups. If you need dental treatment, tell your dentist that you're taking risedronate.

About risperidone
Risperidone is a medicine that helps the symptoms of mental health conditions such as:

schizophrenia (where you may see, hear or feel things that are not there or you believe things that are not true or you feel unusually suspicious or have muddled thoughts)
the mania symptoms of bipolar disorder, where your mood changes between feeling highly excited (mania) and very low (depression)
aggressive or agitated (frustrated, nervous) behaviour in children over 5 years old, or young people with conditions such as contact disorder or autism
aggressive or agitated (frustrated, nervous) behaviour in adults with Alzheimer's disease
It's an antipsychotic medicine that works by affecting chemicals in your brain, such as dopamine and serotonin. It does not cure your condition, but it can help the symptoms.

Risperidone is only available on prescription.

It comes as tablets, including tablets that dissolve in your mouth, and a liquid that you swallow. It can also be given as an injection (for schizophrenia only).

Key facts
Risperidone does not work straight away. It can take several days or even months for some symptoms to get better.
Common side effects include feeling sleepy, problems with your movement and headaches.
It can make you feel more hungry than usual, so you may put on weight.
It's best not to drink alcohol for the first few days of treatment until you see how the medicine affects you.


About rivaroxaban
Rivaroxaban is a type of medicine known as an anticoagulant.

It makes your blood flow through your veins more easily. This means your blood will be less likely to make a dangerous blood clot.

People who are more at risk of developing a blood clot include those who have:

an irregular heartbeat (atrial fibrillation)
recently had surgery to replace a hip or knee joint
unstable angina
coronary heart disease
peripheral arterial disease
It's also used to treat people who have had a health problem caused by a blood clot, such as:

a stroke
a heart attack
a blood clot in the leg – deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
a blood clot in the lungs – a pulmonary embolism
Rivaroxaban is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets and granules.

Key facts
You'll usually take rivaroxaban once or twice a day.
Take rivaroxaban just after you have eaten a meal or snack. It's important to take it with food to help your body absorb the whole dose.
The most common side effect of rivaroxaban is bleeding more easily than normal, such as having nosebleeds, heavier periods, bleeding gums and bruising.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you an anticoagulant alert card. Always carry this with you. Show it to your doctor or dentist before you have surgery or dental treatment. It's important they know you're taking rivaroxaban, as it may put you at risk of bleeding.
You can drink alcohol while taking rivaroxaban. But heavy drinking, especially binge drinking, can make you more likely to bleed.

About ropinirole
-Brand names: Requip, Ipinnia, Repinex
Ropinirole is a medicine used for conditions that affect the way you move. It's used to treat the symptoms of Parkinson's disease and restless legs syndrome.

If you have Parkinson's disease, ropinirole can improve symptoms like shaking (tremors), slowness and stiffness.

If you have restless legs syndrome, it helps control your leg muscles.

Ropinirole is only available on prescription and comes as tablets, including slow-release tablets.

Key facts
You'll usually start on a low dose of ropinirole. This will be increased gradually to help reduce side effects, like feeling sick.
Some people find that ropinirole makes them fall asleep suddenly. This is more likely while your dose is being increased. Do not drive, cycle, or use tools and machinery until you know how this medicine affects you.
Other possible side effects include feeling dizzy when sitting up or lying down, feeling tired and heartburn.
Drinking alcohol while taking ropinirole may make you feel sleepy or tired. When you first start taking ropinirole it's best to not drink alcohol until you see how the medicine affects you.
Do not stop taking this medicine suddenly. If you need to stop taking it, your doctor or specialist nurse will reduce your dose gradually.


About rosuvastatin
Rosuvastatin belongs to a group of medicines called statins. It works by working on the liver to stop it making cholesterol.

Rosuvastatin is used to lower cholesterol if you have been diagnosed with high blood cholesterol. It's also taken to prevent heart disease, including heart attacks and strokes.

Your doctor may also prescribe rosuvastatin if you have diabetes, kidney disease, or a family history of rheumatoid arthritis or heart disease.

Rosuvastatin comes as tablets. It is available on prescription.

Key facts
Rosuvastatin starts to work within a week to reduce cholesterol, but it can take up to a month to achieve its full effect. Your cholesterol levels should drop within 4 weeks if you take your medicine regularly, as prescribed.
Rosuvastatin can make you feel dizzy. If this happens, do not drive, cycle or use machines or tools until you feel better.
Speak to a doctor straight away if you get any unexplained muscle aches and pains, tenderness or weakness.
Keep taking rosuvastatin even if you feel well, as you'll still be getting the benefits. Most people with high cholesterol do not have any symptoms.
Do not take rosuvastatin if you're pregnant or trying to get pregnant.







About salbutamol inhalers
-Brand names: Ventolin, Airomir, Asmalal, Easyhaler, Pulvinal, Salamol, Easi-Breathe, Salbulin
Salbutamol is used to relieve symptoms of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) such as coughing, wheezing and feeling breathless.

It's a type of medicine called a bronchodilator. It works by relaxing the muscles of the airways into the lungs, which makes it easier to breathe.

Salbutamol comes in an inhaler. Salbutamol inhalers are usually blue.

It can also be given using a nebuliser, but this is usually only if you have severe asthma or COPD. A nebuliser is a machine that helps you breathe in your medicine as a mist, using a mask or a mouthpiece. You can use a nebuliser in hospital or you may be given one to manage your condition at home.

Salbutamol is only available on prescription.

Key facts
Salbutamol inhalers are safe and effective with few side effects if you use them as advised by your doctor, pharmacist or nurse.
Salbutamol inhalers are called reliever inhalers because they give you quick relief from breathing problems when you need it. You'll usually also be given a preventer inhaler to help stop (prevent) symptoms and you'll use this every day.
Salbutamol comes in different types of inhaler. Check the instructions for the inhaler you're using, and check your technique with a doctor, nurse or pharmacist.
If you need to use your salbutamol inhaler more than 3 times a week, it could be a sign that your condition is not well controlled. Talk to your doctor, pharmacist or nurse.
Salbutamol is OK to use in pregnancy and while breastfeeding.
Make sure you know when your inhaler needs replacing. If it does not have a counter on the side, you may need to keep a record of how many doses you have left.

About saxagliptin
Saxagliptin is a medicine used to treat type 2 diabetes.

Type 2 diabetes is a condition where the body does not make enough insulin, or the insulin that it makes does not work properly. This can cause high blood sugar levels (hyperglycaemia).

Saxagliptin is usually prescribed when a healthy diet and exercise alone have not been enough to control your blood sugar levels.

It works by increasing the amount of insulin that your body makes. Insulin is the hormone that controls sugar levels in your blood.

Saxagliptin is only available on prescription.

It comes as tablets. It also comes as tablets containing a mixture of saxagliptin and another medicine called metformin or saxagliptin mixed with dapagliflozin. When combined with metformin it's known by the brand name Komboglyze, and Qtern when mixed with dapagliflozin.

Key facts
Saxagliptin starts to work within a few hours. You need to take it every day to make sure your blood sugar stays as stable as possible.
You take saxagliptin once a day.
The most common side effects of saxagliptin are diarrhoea or stomach ache.
Saxagliptin does not usually make you put on weight or lose weight.
If you have diabetes, you're entitled to free prescriptions for all of your medicines, not just your diabetes ones.

About senna
Senna is a natural laxative made from the leaves and fruit of the senna plant. It's used to treat difficulty pooing (constipation). It works by stimulating the muscles in your gut.

Before trying senna, it's better to try other ways to help your constipation by:

having more fibre in your diet
drinking more water and exercising
Only use senna if you have tried other types of laxatives first such as:

bulk-forming laxatives like Fybogel (ispaghula husk) or methylcellulose
osmotic laxatives like lactulose or polyethylene glycol
Senna comes as tablets and as a liquid that you swallow (syrup).

It's available on prescription and to buy from pharmacies. You can buy small packs from supermarkets (up to 20 standard strength tablets, 10 maximum strength tablets or 100ml of syrup).

It's also combined with other ingredients in constipation remedies such as Manevac and Senokot Dual Relief tablets.

Key facts
Senna takes about 8 hours to work.
It's best to take it at bedtime so it works overnight.
The most common side effects are stomach cramps and diarrhoea. These are usually mild and do not last long.
Do not take senna for more than 1 week unless it has been prescribed for you. Long-term use of senna can stop your bowel working properly on its own.
Your pee may turn a red-brown colour while you take senna. This is harmless and returns to normal after you stop taking it.

About sequential combined hormone replacement therapy (HRT)
-Brand names: Evorel Sequi, Elleste Duet, Femoston, Novofem
Sequential combined hormone replacement therapy (HRT) is a medicine that contains the hormones oestrogen and progestogen. It's used to treat menopause symptoms.

Menopause is when your periods stop due to lower hormone levels. It usually affects women between the ages of 45 and 55, but it can happen earlier. It affects anyone who has periods.

As you reach the menopause your ovaries gradually begin to produce less oestrogen and progestogen. This can cause symptoms such as hot flushes, mood swings and vaginal dryness.

Taking HRT can help these symptoms and help prevent other conditions such as weakening of the bones (osteoporosis), which is common after the menopause.

A doctor will usually recommend sequential combined HRT if you have menopause symptoms but you're still having periods, or your last period was less than 12 months ago.

Sequential combined HRT involves taking oestrogen every day and taking progestogen for 10 to 14 days of each 28-day cycle. You'll usually have withdrawal bleeding at the end of each course of progestogen.

This is different to continuous combined HRT, where you take both oestrogen and progestogen every day with no monthly bleeding. Continuous combined HRT is usually prescribed after you have not had a period for 1 year or more.

You'll need to take combined HRT if you still have a womb. This is because taking oestrogen on its own can thicken the womb lining, which slightly increases the risk of womb cancer. Taking progestogen together with oestrogen reduces the risk.

Sequential combined HRT is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets or skin patches.

Brands include Elleste Duet, Clinorette, Femoston, Novofem, Tridesta and Trisequens tablets, and Evorel Sequi and FemSeven Sequi patches.

Key facts
Your medicine will contain 2 or 3 different types of tablet or patch. You'll take the oestrogen part of your medicine every day and take your progestogen for 10 to 14 days of each 28-day cycle.
HRT can take up to 3 months to work fully to improve your symptoms.
Common side effects include headaches, breast tenderness, feeling sick and irregular vaginal bleeding, but these usually improve in the first few months of starting treatment.
If you feel that the HRT you're taking is not helping your symptoms, talk to a doctor. It can take time to find the right type and dose to suit you.
It's common to take sequential combined HRT for 2 to 5 years, and then try stopping to see if your menopause symptoms have improved. Your doctor may suggest swapping to continuous combined HRT after 1 to 2 years when the risk of irregular bleeding will be reduced.
It's important to see your doctor at least once a year for a check-up and to review whether you need to keep taking HRT.

About sertraline
Sertraline is a type of antidepressant known as a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI).

It's often used to treat depression, and also sometimes panic attacks, obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

Sertraline works by increasing the levels of a mood-enhancing chemical called serotonin in your brain.

It helps many people recover from depression, and has fewer unwanted side effects than older antidepressants.

Sertraline comes as tablets, which are available only on prescription.

Key facts
It usually takes 4 to 6 weeks for sertraline to work fully, although you should start to feel better after 1 to 2 weeks.
Side effects such as feeling sick, headaches and trouble sleeping are common. They're usually mild and go away after a couple of weeks.
Sertraline can make you feel more or less hungry than usual, so you may lose or gain weight when you start taking it.
If you and your doctor decide to take you off sertraline, your doctor will recommend reducing your dose gradually to help prevent withdrawal side effects.
Sertraline will not change your personality, it will simply help you feel like yourself again.
Do not drink grapefruit juice while you're taking this medicine. Grapefruit juice can increase the amount of sertraline in your body and increase the risk of side effects.


About sildenafil (Viagra)
Sildenafil is a medicine used to treat erection problems (erectile dysfunction).

Sildenafil is also sometimes used to treat pulmonary hypertension (high blood pressure in the blood vessels that supply the lungs).

If you have erection problems sildenafil works by temporarily increasing blood flow to your penis when you get sexually excited.

In pulmonary hypertension it works by relaxing blood vessels in the chest.

If you buy sildenafil for erectile dysfunction, it can also be known by the brand names Viagra, Aronix, Liberize and Nipatra.

Sildenafil for pulmonary hypertension can also be known by the brand names Revatio and Grandipam.

This medicine is available on prescription and you can also buy it from most pharmacies. It comes as standard tablets, chewable tablets, and as a liquid that you swallow.

Key facts
It usually takes 30 to 60 minutes for sildenafil to work for erectile dysfunction. You can take it up to 4 hours before you want to have sex.
Taking sildenafil alone will not cause an erection. You need to be sexually excited for it to work.
The most common side effects are headaches, feeling sick, indigestion and dizziness. Many people have no side effects or only mild ones.
It can be dangerous to take sildenafil if you also take medicines called nitrates (often given for chest pain). The combination can cause a dangerous fall in your blood pressure. If you're not sure if you're taking a nitrate, ask your doctor or pharmacist.
Do not drink grapefruit juice if you're taking sildenafil (Revatio) for pulmonary hypertension. It affects the way the medicine works.

About simeticone
-Brand names: Wind-eze, WindSetlers, Infacol, Dentinox Colic Drops
Simeticone (or simethicone) is a type of medicine called an antiflatulent. It's used to treat farting (flatulence), trapped wind and bloating, although we cannot be certain if it really works for these symptoms.

People with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) sometimes take simeticone to ease their symptoms.

It may also help with colic in babies, although there's not much scientific evidence that simeticone really works for this.

Simeticone is a mixture of silica gel and dimeticone (or dimethicone), a type of silicone, and is also known as activated dimeticone. It works by bringing together the small gas bubbles in your gut to form bigger bubbles, allowing trapped air to pass through your body more easily.

You can buy it in pharmacies without a prescription, and in some shops.

It comes as tablets, capsules, drops and a liquid that you swallow.

Simeticone often comes combined with other ingredients such as medicines to treat indigestion (antacids) or diarrhoea. When it's combined with other ingredients, brand names include Maalox Plus and Imodium Plus.

Key facts
Simeticone usually starts to work within 30 minutes.
For colic, you may need to give it to your baby for a few days to see the full benefits.
It's generally safe with no known side effects.
Most people will only need to take it occasionally, or over a short period of time.
Simeticone can be taken during pregnancy and while breastfeeding.

About simvastatin
Simvastatin is used to lower cholesterol if you’ve been diagnosed with high blood cholesterol. It’s also taken to prevent heart disease, including heart attacks and strokes. It belongs to a group of medicines called statins.

Your doctor may prescribe simvastatin if you have a family history of heart disease, or a long-term health condition such as rheumatoid arthritis, or type 1 or type 2 diabetes.

Simvastatin is available on prescription as tablets. You can also buy it as a low strength, 10mg tablet from a pharmacy.

Simvastatin is also available as tablets combined with other medicines that lower cholesterol:

Cholib – combined with fenofibrate
Inegy – combined with ezetimibe
Key facts
It’s unusual to have any side effects from taking simvastatin.
Most people with high cholesterol do not have any symptoms, but keep taking simvastatin even if you feel well. When taken regularly, it will take about 4 weeks for your cholesterol level to fall.
Do not take simvastatin if you’re pregnant. Talk to your doctor of pharmacist if you’re breastfeeding as they may recommend that you take a different medicine.
Do not drink grapefruit juice while you’re taking simvastatin. It can increase the level of simvastatin in your blood.
Because your body makes most of its cholesterol at night, it is better to take simvastatin in the evening.

About sitagliptin
Sitagliptin is a medicine used to treat type 2 diabetes.

Type 2 diabetes is a condition where the body does not make enough insulin, or the insulin that it makes does not work properly. This can cause high blood sugar levels (hyperglycaemia).

Sitagliptin is prescribed for people who still have high blood sugar, even though they have a sensible diet and exercise regularly.

It works by increasing the amount of insulin that your body makes. Insulin is the hormone that controls sugar levels in your blood.

Sitagliptin is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets.

It also comes as tablets containing a mixture of sitagliptin and another diabetes medicine called metformin. This is known by the brand name Janumet.

Key facts
Sitagliptin starts to work within a few hours. You need to take it every day to make sure your blood sugar stays as stable as possible.
You take sitagliptin once a day.
The most common side effect of sitagliptin is headaches.
This medicine does not usually make you put on weight.
If you have diabetes, you're entitled to free prescriptions for all of your medicines, not just your diabetes ones.


About sodium cromoglicate capsules
-Brand name: Nalcrom
Sodium cromoglicate capsules are part of a group of medicines called anti-allergics. They are used to treat allergic reactions to food.

These capsules work by stopping the release of the natural substances in your body (including histamine) that cause allergic reactions. They also reduce how severe your symptoms are.

You'll only be prescribed sodium cromoglicate capsules if you've had a test to prove that you're allergic to certain foods.

Sodium cromoglicate is only available on prescription. It comes as capsules.

Sodium cromoglicate also comes as eye drops to treat hay fever and other allergies. You can buy these from pharmacies and shops.

Key facts
For sodium cromoglicate capsules to work properly, you need to use them regularly for several weeks.
Your allergy symptoms from certain foods should get better within 2 to 3 weeks of taking sodium cromoglicate capsules.
Most people will not get any side effects from sodium cromoglicate capsules.
It's safe to take sodium cromoglicate with most prescription medicines, and everyday painkillers like paracetamol and ibuprofen.
Even if you feel better, do not stop taking your capsules unless your doctor says it's OK. Your allergy symptoms could come back or get worse.

About sodium cromoglicate eye drops
-Brand names: Allercrom, Catacrom, Murine Hayfever Relief, Opticrom, Optrex
Sodium cromoglicate eye drops are part of a group of medicines called anti-allergics.

They are used to treat allergic conjunctivitis, a condition triggered by hay fever, house mites and other allergies. It can irritate your eyes and make them red, watery, itchy and puffy.

Sodium cromoglicate eye drops work by stopping the release of the natural substances (including histamine) in your body that cause allergic reactions. They also reduce how severe your symptoms are when you come into contact with any substances you’re allergic to.

Sodium cromoglicate comes as eye drops in bottles that contain a preservative (which makes it last longer before expiring). They also come as single-dose droppers that are preservative-free. These are thrown away after use.

You can buy the eye drops from pharmacies and supermarkets, without a prescription.

Sodium cromoglicate also comes as capsules that are only available on prescription.

Important
If you have bought the eye drops without the advice of a doctor or pharmacist, you must be sure that your eye irritation is caused by an allergy.

Key facts
For sodium cromoglicate eye drops to work properly, you need to use them regularly for 2 weeks. If there is no change after that, speak to a pharmacist or your doctor.
Do not use sodium cromoglicate eye drops for more than 4 weeks after first opening the bottle. If you use them for longer they may not work as well, and it could cause eye infections.
Sodium cromoglicate eye drops may sting your eyes a little when you first drop them in, but this does not last long.
It's safe to use sodium cromoglicate eye drops with most prescription medicines.


About sodium valproate
-Brand names: Dyzantil, Epilim, Episenta, Epival
Sodium valproate is used to treat epilepsy and bipolar disorder.

It's occasionally used to prevent migraine headaches.

This medicine is only available on prescription. If you're under 55 years old, it will need to be prescribed by a specialist doctor. The doctor will also need a second opinion from another specialist to show that there is no other suitable treatment for you.

It comes as capsules, tablets and a liquid that you swallow. It also comes as granules that you mix with food or drink.

Sodium valproate can also be given by injection, but this is usually only done in hospital.

If taken during pregnancy, sodium valproate can cause problems for a baby's development, including birth defects and lifelong learning difficulties. Sodium valproate is not recommended if there's a chance that you could become pregnant.

For women and girls of childbearing age, if you do need to take sodium valproate then your doctor will enrol you on the valproate pregnancy prevention programme, called Prevent.

For men taking sodium valproate, your fertility could be affected. It may also cause learning or behavioural problems in your child if your partner becomes pregnant while you're taking sodium valproate.

Important:Valproate pregnancy prevention programme
The valproate pregnancy prevention programme aims to stop you from accidentally becoming pregnant while taking sodium valproate. It includes:

an annual review – you should be reviewed every year by your doctor or nurse, who will assess whether you need to continue taking sodium valproate or whether it's possible to change your medicine
contraception advice – if you are taking sodium valproate then you must be using reliable contraception, even if you're not currently sexually active
Your doctor or nurse can advise you about reliable contraception. You'll be asked to sign a form to say that you're using contraception and understand the risks of becoming pregnant while taking sodium valproate.

It's important to get advice from your doctor if:

you become pregnant
you want to plan a pregnancy
For men who could possibly have children, it's important to discuss sodium valproate with your doctor. You and your partner should use contraception while you're taking sodium valproate and for at least 3 months after stopping.

For men who are planning to start a family within the next year, speak to a doctor about your treatment options. Do not stop taking sodium valproate without speaking to a doctor first.

Updated: 11 March 2025

Find out more about Prevent, the valproate pregnancy prevention programme, on the Electronic Medicines Compendium website (PDF only, 318KB).

Key facts
You'll usually take sodium valproate once or twice a day. You can take it with or without food.
You'll usually start on a low dose. Your dose will gradually increase over a few days or weeks.
Valproic acid and semisodium valproate are similar to sodium valproate and work in the same way. However, these medicines are used to treat different conditions and doses will vary.
There are also brands such as Epilim Chrono, Epilim Chronosphere and Dyzantil, which contain mostly sodium valproate, with some valproic acid.
If you're pregnant, or there's a chance you could become pregnant, sodium valproate is not recommended for treating migraine. For epilepsy and bipolar disorder, your doctor will only prescribe sodium valproate for you if there are no other suitable treatments.

About solifenacin
-Brand name: Vesicare
Solifenacin is a medicine used to treat symptoms of an overactive bladder. These can include:

a sudden and urgent need to pee (urinary urgency)
needing to pee more often than usual (urinary frequency)
not being able to hold your pee (urinary incontinence)
Solifenacin works by relaxing the muscles in your bladder. This means your bladder can hold more liquid and you do not need to pee as often or as urgently.

Solifenacin is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets and as a liquid that you swallow.

Solifenacin also comes combined with tamsulosin, a medicine for prostate problems. The brand names for solifenacin with tamsulosin are Vesomni and Vecit. Your doctor may prescribe this to treat a sudden and urgent need to pee if you have an enlarged prostate.

Key facts
You'll usually take solifenacin once a day.
Solifenacin starts to work within 3 to 8 hours, but it can take up to 4 to 6 weeks to work fully.
Common side effects include a dry mouth and blurred vision.
You'll usually take this medicine long term to help keep your symptoms under control. Your doctor will check every 6 to 12 months to see if you need to keep taking it.
Do not drive a car or ride a bike if solifenacin makes you sleepy, gives you blurred vision, or makes you feel dizzy, clumsy or unable to concentrate.


1. About sotalol
Sotalol belongs to a group of medicines called beta blockers.

It's used to treat atrial fibrillation and other conditions that cause an irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia).

This medicine is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets.

2. Key facts
Sotalol slows down your heart rate and makes it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body.
It starts to work after about 4 hours, but it can take 2 to 3 days to fully take effect.
Your first dose of sotalol may make you feel dizzy, so take it at bedtime. After that, if you do not feel dizzy, you can take it in the morning.
You'll usually take sotalol either once a day, in the morning, or twice a day, in the morning and evening.
The main side effects of sotalol are feeling dizzy or sick, feeling tired, having diarrhoea or a headache. These are usually mild and short-lived. You're more likely to have side effects if you're on a very high dose of sotalol.

About sotrovimab (Xevudy)
Sotrovimab is a biological medicine. It's also known as a neutralising monoclonal antibody (nMAb). It's used to treat COVID-19.

nMAbs are synthetic proteins that act like human antibodies in the immune system. They are made by cloning an antibody that can stick to the spike protein of the virus and neutralise it. They stick to the virus and stop it from getting into your lungs and causing an infection.

If you are eligible for COVID-19 treatment you will usually be offered an antiviral medicine called Paxlovid as a first treatment. However, if it’s not suitable for you, you may be offered sotrovimab.

It's given to you through a drip, usually in your arm (infusion). It will be given in hospital or at a local centre.

If you have tested positive for COVID-19 and are eligible, call your GP, NHS 111 or hospital specialist as soon as possible. This is so they can consider referring you for an assessment for COVID-19 treatment

Find out more about how to get treatments for COVID-19.

Key facts
Sotrovimab will keep working in your body and help prevent reinfection from COVID-19 for at least 4 weeks.
The dose of sotrovimab is 500mg. It's given to you through a drip, usually in your arm (infusion) over 30 minutes. You'll only need 1 dose.
The most common side effects include feeling sick, feeling dizzy, an itchy rash or redness or warmth on your skin.
If you feel dizzy after your treatment, do not drive a car, ride a bike, or use tools or machinery.


About spironolactone
-Brand name: Aldactone
Spironolactone is a type of medicine called a diuretic. These medicines are sometimes called "water tablets" because they make you pee more.

It is also an anti-androgen, which means it stops male hormones, such as testosterone, from working.

Spironolactone is used to treat build-up of fluid in your body (oedema) caused by:

heart failure
liver disease – it treats build-up of fluid in your abdomen, called ascites
kidney disease – it treats a condition that causes your kidneys to leak large amounts of protein into your pee, called nephrotic syndrome
high levels of aldosterone (a hormone made by the adrenal glands)
It can also be used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension) when other medicines have not worked.

Spironolactone is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets.

Spironolactone also comes as tablets that contain other diuretics. When it's mixed with furosemide it's called by the brand name Lasilactone. When it's mixed with hydroflumethiazide it's called by the brand name Aldactide.

Key facts
You'll usually take spironolactone once a day in the morning. Some people need to take it twice a day. If you're taking it twice a day, take the second dose before 4pm.
Take spironolactone with food, to help stop you feeling or being sick.
The most common side effect of spironolactone is high potassium levels. Your doctor will give you blood tests while you're taking spironolactone to make sure your potassium levels are stable.
Do not have low-sodium salt or salt substitutes, like Lo-Salt, because they contain a lot of potassium. Using these with spironolactone can cause your potassium levels to become too high.
Try to limit other food and drink that contain a lot of potassium, including bananas, avocados, pulses, nuts and salmon.

Statins are a group of medicines that can help lower the level of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol in the blood.

LDL cholesterol is often referred to as "bad cholesterol", and statins reduce the production of it inside the liver.

Why have I been offered statins?
Having a high level of LDL cholesterol is potentially dangerous, as it can lead to a hardening and narrowing of the arteries (atherosclerosis) and cardiovascular disease (CVD).

CVD is a general term that describes a disease of the heart or blood vessels. It's a very common cause of death in the UK.

The main types of CVD are:

coronary heart disease – when the blood supply to the heart becomes restricted
angina – chest pain caused by reduced blood flow to the heart muscles
heart attacks – when the supply of blood to the heart is suddenly blocked
stroke – when the supply of blood to the brain becomes blocked
A doctor may recommend taking statins if either:

you have been diagnosed with a form of CVD
your personal and family medical history suggests you're likely to develop CVD at some point over the next 10 years and lifestyle measures have not reduced this risk
Find out more about when statins may be recommended.

Taking statins
Statins come as tablets that are taken once a day.

Your dose will depend on why you need the medicine, your cholesterol levels, and other medicines you're taking.

Your GP may increase your statins to the maximum dose. This helps to manage your cholesterol levels and prevent cardiovascular disease.

For some types of statin it does not matter what time of day you take it, as long as you stick to the same time.

Some types of statin should be taken in the evening.

Check with your doctor whether there's a particular time of day you should take your statin.

You usually have to continue taking statins for life because if you stop taking them, your cholesterol will return to a high level.

If you forget to take your dose, do not take an extra one to make up for it. Just take your next dose as usual the following day.

If you accidentally take too many statin tablets (more than your usual daily dose), contact a doctor or pharmacist for advice or call NHS 111.

Cautions and interactions
Statins can sometimes interact with other medicines, increasing the risk of serious side effects, such as muscle damage.

Some types of statin can also interact with grapefruit juice.

It's very important to read the information leaflet that comes with your medicine to check if there are any interactions you should be aware of.

If in doubt, contact a GP or pharmacist for advice.

Find out more things to consider when taking statins.

Side effects of statins
Many people who take statins experience no or very few side effects. Others experience some side effects, but these are usually minor, such as diarrhoea, a headache or feeling sick.

Your doctor should discuss the risks and benefits of taking statins if they're offered to you.

The risks of any side effects also have to be balanced against the benefits of preventing serious problems. 

Find out more about the side effects of statins.

Alternatives to statins
If you're at risk of developing CVD in the near future, your doctor will usually recommend lifestyle changes to reduce this risk before they suggest that you take statins.

Lifestyle changes that can reduce your cholesterol level and CVD risk include:

eating a healthy, balanced diet
exercising regularly
maintaining a healthy weight
limiting the amount of alcohol you drink
stopping smoking
Statins may be recommended if these measures do not help.

Read more about treating high cholesterol and preventing CVD.

Types of statin
There are 5 types of statin available on prescription in the UK:

atorvastatin (Lipitor)
fluvastatin (Lescol)
pravastatin (Lipostat)
rosuvastatin (Crestor)
simvastatin (Zocor)
Most people start with atorvastatin. Not all statins are suitable for everyone, so you may need to try different types until you find one that's suitable.


opical corticosteroids
Topical corticosteroids are a type of steroid medicine applied directly to the skin to reduce inflammation and irritation.

Topical corticosteroids are available in several different forms, including:

creams
lotions
gels
mousses
ointments
tapes and bandages
solutions
They're available in 4 different strengths (potencies):

mild
moderate
potent
very potent
Mild corticosteroids, such as clobetasone, hydrocortisone skin cream and hydrocortisone for piles and itchy bottom, can often be bought over the counter from pharmacies.

Stronger types, such as beclometasone, betamethasone, clobetasol, fluticasone and mometasone, are only available on prescription.

Read about other types of corticosteroids, including tablets, capsules, inhalers and injected corticosteroids.

Corticosteroids should not be confused with anabolic steroids.

Conditions treated with topical corticosteroids
Conditions widely treated with topical corticosteroids include:

eczema – such as atopic eczema
contact dermatitis – which causes symptoms such as dandruff and scaly patches on the skin
psoriasis
Topical corticosteroids cannot cure these conditions, but can help relieve the symptoms.

Who can use topical corticosteroids
Most adults and children can use topical corticosteroids safely, but there are situations when they are not recommended.

They should not be used if:

you have infected skin, unless advised by a doctor
you have certain skin conditions, including rosacea and acne
Most topical corticosteroids are considered safe to use during pregnancy or breastfeeding. Your doctor will consider the area of skin where you need to use it, how often you'll use it and the condition of your skin. You should wash off any steroid cream applied to your breasts before feeding your baby.

Very potent topical corticosteroids are not usually prescribed for pregnant or breastfeeding women, or for very young children. Sometimes you may be prescribed them under the supervision of a skincare specialist (dermatologist).

How to use topical corticosteroids
Unless instructed otherwise by your doctor, follow the directions on the patient information leaflet that comes with the medicine. This will give details of how much to apply and how often.

Most people only need to use the medicine once or twice a day for 3 to 7 days. Occasionally a doctor may suggest using it less frequently over a longer period of time.

The medicine should only be applied to affected areas of skin. Gently smooth a thin layer onto your skin in the direction the hair grows. Wash your hands before and after you've applied the medicine, unless you are treating an area on your hands.

If you're using both topical corticosteroids and emollients, wait 20 to 30 minutes between using them.

Fingertip units
Sometimes, the amount of medicine you're advised to use will be given in fingertip units (FTUs).

A FTU (about 500mg) is the amount needed to squeeze a line from the tip of an adult finger to the first crease of the finger. It should be enough to treat an area of skin double the size of the flat of your hand with your fingers together.

The recommended dosage will depend on what part of the body is being treated. This is because the skin is thinner in certain parts of the body and more sensitive to the effects of corticosteroids.

For adults, the recommended FTUs to be applied in a single dose are:

0.5 FTU for genitals
1 FTU for hands, elbows or knees
1.5 FTUs for the feet, including the soles
2.5 FTUs for the face and neck
3 FTUs for the scalp
4 FTUs for a hand and arm together, or the buttocks
8 FTUs for 1 leg and foot, the chest or back
For children, the recommended FTUs will depend on their age. A GP can advise you on this.

Side effects of topical corticosteroids
If you use them correctly, topical corticosteroids rarely have serious side effects.

The most common side effect of topical corticosteroids is a burning or stinging sensation when the medicine is applied. However, this usually improves as your skin gets used to the treatment.

Less common side effects can include:

worsening or spreading of a skin infection you already have
inflamed hair follicles (folliculitis)
thinning of the skin, which can make the affected skin more vulnerable to damage; for example, you may bruise more easily
stretch marks, which are likely to be permanent, although they'll probably become less noticeable over time
contact dermatitis, which is a skin irritation caused by a mild allergic reaction to the substances in a particular topical corticosteroid
acne, or worsening of acne
rosacea, which is a condition that causes the face to become red and flushed
changes in skin colour – this is usually more noticeable in people with dark skin
excessive hair growth on the area of skin being treated
Side effects are more likely if you're:

using a more potent corticosteroid
using it for a very long time, or over a large area
The elderly and very young are more vulnerable to side effects.

If potent or very potent topical corticosteroids are used for a long time or over a large area, there's a risk of the medicine being absorbed into the bloodstream and causing internal side effects, such as:

decreased growth in children
Cushing's syndrome
This is not a full list of all the possible side effects. For more information on side effects, see the leaflet that comes with the medicine.

If you're using a potent or very potent topical corticosteroid for several weeks or more, you may be given a steroid treatment card that explains how you can reduce the risk of side effects.

If you need any medical or dental treatment, show your steroid treatment card to the doctor, dentist or pharmacist so they know that you're using topical corticosteroids.

Withdrawal side effects
If you stop using topical corticosteroids after using them continuously for a long time (usually over 12 months in adults), you may have a withdrawal reaction. These can sometimes be severe. Your doctor may advise stopping the treatment gradually to avoid this.

Withdrawal side effects can include:

redness or changes in skin colour (this may not be as noticeable on brown or black skin)
burning, stinging, itching or peeling of the skin, or oozing, open sores
a flare up of the skin condition you were treating
If you’ve been using topical corticosteroids for a long time, it’s a good idea to ask your doctor to review your treatment.

Reporting side effects
The Yellow Card Scheme allows you to report suspected side effects from any type of medicine you're taking. It's run by the medicines safety watchdog called the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA).

Steroid inhalers
Steroid inhalers, also called corticosteroid inhalers, are anti-inflammatory sprays or powders that you breathe in.

They're mainly used to treat asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

Steroid inhalers are only available on prescription. Common types include:

beclometasone
budesonide
fluticasone
mometasone
They're sometimes called "preventer inhalers" because they can help prevent your symptoms.

How and when to use a steroid inhaler
There are several types of steroid inhaler, which are used in slightly different ways.

A doctor or nurse will show you how to use your inhaler. Make sure you use it exactly as advised. Asthma + Lung UK has videos explaining how to use the different types of inhaler.

You'll usually need to take 1 or 2 puffs from your inhaler in the morning and 1 or 2 puffs in the evening.

Some people can use their inhaler once a day once their symptoms are under control. If you use it once a day, you'll usually be advised to use it in the evening.

It's important to keep using your inhaler, even if you feel better. It will only stop your symptoms if it's used every day.

If you miss a dose or take too much
If you forget to take a dose, take it as soon as you remember. If it's nearly time for your next dose, skip the one you missed.

Do not take a double dose to make up for a forgotten dose.

Accidentally taking too many puffs from a steroid inhaler is unlikely to be harmful if it's a one-off. Speak to a doctor, nurse or a pharmacist if you're worried.

Using a steroid inhaler too much over a long period can increase your chances of getting side effects.

Stopping treatment
Do not stop using your inhaler unless you're advised to by a doctor.

When you stop your treatment, you usually need to reduce your dose gradually.

This can help avoid unpleasant side effects (withdrawal symptoms), such as severe tiredness, joint pain, being sick and dizziness.

Side effects of steroid inhalers
Steroid inhalers usually cause few or no side effects if used correctly and at low doses.

Some people get:

a sore mouth or throat
a hoarse or croaky voice
a cough
oral thrush – a fungal infection that causes white patches, redness and soreness in the mouth
If you're taking a high dose for a long time, there's also a small chance you could get some of the side effects of steroid tablets, such as an increased appetite, mood changes and difficulty sleeping (insomnia).

Taking high doses for a long time can slow down the normal growth of children and teenagers. Your child's doctor will monitor their height and weight carefully for as long as they're taking steroid medicine. This will help them spot any slowing down of your child's growth and change their treatment if needed.

You can report any suspected side effect to the Yellow Card scheme.

Coping with side effects of steroid inhalers
The following tips may help reduce the side effects of steroid inhalers:

use your inhaler exactly as you've been shown – speak to a doctor or nurse if you're not sure how to use your inhaler correctly
use your inhaler with a spacer, a hollow plastic tube or container with a mouthpiece at one end and a hole for the inhaler at the other – find out more about spacers from Asthma + Lung UK
rinse your mouth out with water and spit it out or brush your teeth after using your inhaler
If you're taking a high dose for a long period of time, you may be given a blue steroid treatment card that explains how you can reduce the risk of side effects. You may also be given a red steroid emergency card.

If you need any medical or dental treatment, show your blue or red steroid card to the doctor, dentist or pharmacist so they know that you're using a steroid inhaler.

Using steroid inhalers with other medicines, food or alcohol
Some medicines can interfere with the way steroid inhalers work, but this is uncommon if you're only taking low doses for a short period.

Tell a doctor if you take any other medicines, including herbal remedies and supplements, before starting to use a steroid inhaler.

If you're already using an inhaler, ask a doctor or pharmacist for advice before taking any other medicines, remedies or supplements.

You can usually drink alcohol while using a steroid inhaler and you should be able to eat most foods. Do not smoke though, as this can make your medicine less effective and make your symptoms worse.

Who can use steroid inhalers
Most people can use steroid inhalers.

Tell your doctor before starting treatment if you:

have had an allergic reaction to steroids in the past
have tuberculosis (TB) or another infection of your lungs or airways
are pregnant, breastfeeding or trying for a baby
Steroid inhalers are normally safe to use while breastfeeding and during pregnancy, but it's a good idea to get medical advice first.

If you need to take a high dose during pregnancy, you may need regular check-ups to check for any side effects.

How steroid inhalers work
Steroids are a man-made version of hormones normally produced by the adrenal glands, which are 2 small glands found above the kidneys.

When they're inhaled, steroids reduce swelling (inflammation) in your airways.

This can help reduce symptoms of asthma and COPD, such as wheezing and shortness of breath.

Steroid inhalers are different to the anabolic steroids that some people use illegally to increase their muscle mass.

Steroid injections
Steroid injections, also called corticosteroid injections, are anti-inflammatory medicines used to treat a range of conditions.

They can be used to treat problems such as joint pain, arthritis, sciatica and inflammatory bowel disease.

Steroid injections are only given by healthcare professionals. Common examples include hydrocortisone, triamcinolone and methylprednisolone.

How steroid injections are given
Steroid injections are given by a healthcare professional in a hospital, clinic or GP surgery.

They can be given in several different ways, including:

into a joint (an intra-articular injection)
into a muscle (an intramuscular injection)
into the spine (an epidural injection)
into the blood (an intravenous injection)
The injections normally take a few days to start working, although some work in a few hours. The effect usually wears off after a few weeks or months.

If you're having an injection to relieve pain, it may also contain local anaesthetic. This provides immediate pain relief that lasts up to a few hours.

You should be able to go home soon after the injection. You may need to rest the treated body part for a few days.

Side effects of steroid injections
Possible side effects of steroid injections depend on where the injection is given.

Side effects of injections into the joints, muscles or spine can include:

pain and discomfort for a few days – paracetamol may help with this
temporary bruising or a collection of blood under the skin
flushing of the face for a few hours
changes to your vision such as blurred vision – speak to your specialist if this happens
an infection, causing redness, swelling and pain – get medical advice as soon as possible if you have these symptoms
a loss of fat where the injection was given – this can cause dimples in the skin and may be permanent
paler skin around the site of the injection – this may be permanent
If you have diabetes, your blood sugar level may go up for a few days.

If you have high blood pressure, your blood pressure may go up for a few days.

Epidural injections can also occasionally give you a very painful headache that's only relieved by lying down. This should get better on its own, but tell your specialist if you get it.

Side effects of injections given into the blood tend to be similar to side effects of steroid tablets, such as increased appetite, mood changes and difficulty sleeping (insomnia).

If you're having steroid injections for more than a few weeks, or you're prescribed a high dose, you may be given a blue steroid treatment card that explains how you can reduce the risk of side effects. You may also be given a red steroid emergency card.

If you need any medical or dental treatment, show your blue or red steroid card to the doctor, dentist or pharmacist so they know that you're having steroid injections.

You can report any suspected side effect to Yellow Card, the UK safety scheme.

Who can have steroid injections
Most people can have steroid injections.

Tell the doctor before having treatment if you:

have had a steroid injection in the last few weeks – you usually need to wait at least 3 months between injections
have had 4 steroid injections in the last year – doctors usually recommend no more than 4 injections in the same area in the space of 12 months
have had an allergic reaction to steroids in the past
have an infection (including eye infections)
have recently had, or are about to have, any vaccinations
are pregnant, breastfeeding or trying for a baby
have any other conditions, such as diabetes, epilepsy, high blood pressure, or problems with your liver, heart or kidneys
are taking other medicines, such as anticoagulants
Steroid injections may not always be suitable in these cases, although the doctor may recommend them if they think the benefits outweigh any risks.

How steroid injections work
Steroids closely copy the effects of hormones normally produced by the adrenal glands, 2 small glands found above the kidneys.

When injected into a joint or muscle, steroids reduce redness and swelling (inflammation) in the nearby area. This can help relieve pain and stiffness.

When injected into the blood, they can reduce inflammation throughout the body, as well as reduce the activity of the immune system, the body's natural defence against illness and infection.

This can help treat autoimmune conditions, such as multiple sclerosis (MS), which are caused by the immune system mistakenly attacking the body.

Steroid injections are different from the anabolic steroids used illegally by some people to increase their muscle mass.



Steroid nasal sprays
Steroid nasal sprays, also called corticosteroid nasal sprays, are anti-inflammatory medicines that you spray into your nose.

They can be used to treat a range of conditions, including hay fever, sinusitis, non-allergic rhinitis and nasal polyps.

Some steroid nasal sprays are available to buy from pharmacies and shops, while others are only available on prescription. Steroid nasal drops are also available.

Common examples of steroid nasal sprays include:

beclometasone
budesonide
fluticasone
mometasone
How and when to use steroid nasal sprays
Steroid nasal sprays can be used as a long-term treatment or just when they're needed.

For hay fever, it's best to use them from 1 to 2 weeks before you think your symptoms will start, as they can take a few days to work.

The leaflet that comes with your spray should explain how to use it and how often. Ask a pharmacist or doctor if you're not sure.

It's important to use your spray regularly, even if you're feeling better. It will only help if it's used every day.

If you miss a dose or take too much
If you forget to take a dose, take it as soon as you remember. If it's nearly time for your next dose, skip the one you missed.

Do not take a double dose to make up for a forgotten dose.

Accidentally using too much steroid nasal spray is unlikely to be harmful. Speak to a pharmacist or doctor if you're worried.

Using a steroid nasal spray too much over a long period can increase your risk of getting side effects.

Stopping treatment
If you've bought a steroid nasal spray from a pharmacy or shop, check the leaflet that comes with the medicine. This will tell you how long you can continuously use it for without speaking to a doctor or pharmacist. This is usually between 1 and 3 months.

Stop using it when you think you no longer need it. Ask a pharmacist for advice if you're not sure when to stop.

If you're taking a prescription spray, do not stop using it unless the doctor advises you to do so.

Side effects of steroid nasal sprays
Steroid nasal sprays do not usually cause any significant side effects if used correctly and at normal doses.

Side effects can include:

a stinging or burning sensation in the nose
dryness and crustiness in the nose
a dry, irritated throat
an unpleasant taste in the mouth
itchiness, redness and swelling in the nose
nosebleeds
Serious side effects are rare but can include changes to your eyesight, such as blurred vision or a cloudy lens in the eye, or problems with your breathing. See a doctor or contact 111 straight away if you have these.

If you're taking a high dose for a long time, there's also a small chance you could get some of the side effects of steroid tablets, such as increased appetite, mood changes and sleeping problems (insomnia).

You can report any suspected side effect on the UK Yellow Card safety scheme website.

Using steroid nasal sprays with other medicines, food or alcohol
Some medicines can interfere with the way steroid nasal sprays work, although this is uncommon.

Check the leaflet that comes with your spray to see if it could be affected by other medicines. Ask a pharmacist or doctor if you're unsure.

You can usually drink alcohol while using a steroid nasal spray and you do not normally need to avoid any particular foods.

Who can use steroid nasal sprays
Most people can use steroid nasal sprays.

Ask a pharmacist or doctor for advice before using one if you:

have had an allergic reaction to steroids in the past
have recently had surgery on your nose
have ever had tuberculosis (TB)
have an infection in your nose or sinuses
are taking, or have recently taken, other steroid medicines
are looking for a nasal spray for your child (some nasal sprays are not suitable for children)
are pregnant, breastfeeding or trying for a baby
Steroid nasal sprays are normally safe to use while breastfeeding and during pregnancy, but it's a good idea to get medical advice first.

How steroid nasal sprays work
Steroids closely copy the effects of hormones normally produced by the adrenal glands, which are 2 small glands above the kidneys.

When sprayed into the nose, steroids reduce inflammation (swelling).

This can help relieve symptoms such as sneezing and a runny or blocked nose. It can also help to reduce the size of any swellings (such as polyps in your nose.

Steroid nasal sprays are not the same as anabolic steroids, which are often used illegally by some people to increase their muscle mass.

Steroid tablets
Steroid tablets, also called corticosteroid tablets, are a type of anti-inflammatory medicine used to treat a range of conditions.

They can be used to treat problems such as allergies, asthma, inflammatory bowel disease, Addison's disease and arthritis.

Steroid tablets are only available on prescription. Dissolvable and liquid versions are also available.

Common examples include:

prednisolone
betamethasone
dexamethasone
hydrocortisone
How and when to take steroid tablets
Take your medicine as instructed by your doctor. They'll explain how much to take and how often.

It's normally best to take steroid tablets with or soon after a meal – usually breakfast – because this can stop them irritating your stomach.

If you miss a dose or take too much
If you forget a dose, take it as soon as you remember. If it's almost time for your next dose, skip the one you missed.

Do not take a double dose to make up for a forgotten dose.

If you take more than your prescribed dose of steroid tablets, contact 111 for advice.

Taking too many steroid tablets over a long period can make you more likely to get side effects.

Coming off treatment
Do not stop taking your medicine without talking to your doctor.

If you've been taking steroid tablets for more than a few weeks, you usually need to reduce your dose gradually. Stopping suddenly can cause your adrenal gland, which makes important hormones for the body, to stop working. This is known as adrenal insufficiency.

Symptoms of adrenal insufficiency include:

feeling extremely tired
feeling and being sick
dizziness
loss of appetite and weight loss
Your original symptoms may also come back suddenly.

Your doctor will be able to provide more advice about how to safely stop taking steroids.

Side effects of steroid tablets
Taking steroid tablets for less than 3 weeks is unlikely to cause any significant long-term side effects. But you may get some side effects if you need to take them for longer, at a high dose or if you need frequent courses.

Side effects of steroid tablets can include:

indigestion or heartburn
increased appetite, which could lead to weight gain
difficulty sleeping (insomnia)
changes in mood and behaviour, such as feeling irritable or anxious
an increased risk of infections – especially chickenpox, shingles and measles
high blood sugar (hyperglycaemia) or diabetes
weakening of the bones (osteoporosis)
high blood pressure (hypertension)
Cushing's syndrome – which can cause symptoms such as thin skin that bruises easily, a build-up of fat on the neck and shoulders and a puffy, rounded face that may also look red
eye conditions, such as glaucoma and cataracts
mental health problems, such as depression or suicidal thoughts; get an urgent GP appointment or call 111 if this happens
Most side effects will pass once treatment stops. Tell your doctor if they bother you.

You can report any suspected side effect on the UK Yellow Card safety scheme website.

Coping with side effects of steroid tablets
The following tips may help reduce the side effects of steroid tablets:

take your tablets in the morning with breakfast (although some specially coated tablets can be taken without food) – this may help prevent indigestion, heartburn and sleeping difficulties
eat a healthy, balanced diet and exercise regularly – this may help prevent weight gain and osteoporosis
avoid close contact with people who are ill; especially people who have measles, chickenpox or shingles – get medical advice as soon as possible if you think you may have been exposed to someone with an infection
ensure your vaccines are up-to-date – but do not have any "live" vaccines, such as the Zostavax shingles vaccine
Your doctor may reduce your dose or suggest taking your tablets less often (for example, every other day) if you're having side effects.

They may also sometimes recommend other medicines to take alongside steroids to protect you from some of the side effects, such as medicines to help prevent indigestion or heartburn, or medicines that help strengthen the bones.

You may be given a blue steroid treatment card that explains how you can reduce the risk of side effects. You may also be given a red steroid emergency card.

If you need any medical or dental treatment, show your blue or red steroid card to the doctor, dentist or pharmacist so they know that you're taking steroid tablets.

Taking steroid tablets with other medicines, food or alcohol
Some medicines interfere with the way steroid tablets work. Tell your doctor if you take any other medicines, including herbal remedies and supplements, before starting steroid tablets.

If you're already taking steroid tablets, ask your doctor or a pharmacist for advice before taking any other medicines, remedies or supplements.

You can usually drink alcohol while taking steroid tablets, but do not drink too much as this may irritate your stomach.

You can also eat most foods while taking steroid tablets. Do not eat liquorice while taking prednisolone, however, as this can increase the amount of the medicine in your body.

Who can take steroid tablets
Most people can take steroid tablets.

Tell your doctor before starting treatment if you:

have had an allergic reaction to steroids in the past
have an infection (including eye infections)
you have recently had, or are about to have, any vaccinations
have an open wound that has not healed yet
are pregnant, breastfeeding or trying for a baby
have any other conditions, such as diabetes, epilepsy, high blood pressure, or problems with your liver, heart or kidneys
have a mental health problem, such as depression
Steroid tablets may not be suitable in these cases, although your doctor may recommend them if they think the benefits outweigh any risks.

Steroid tablets are not usually recommended for children as they can cause growth problems.

How steroid tablets work
Steroids closely copy the effects of hormones normally produced by the adrenal glands, which are 2 small glands found above the kidneys.

When taken in doses higher than the amount your body normally produces, steroids reduce redness and swelling (inflammation). This can help with inflammatory conditions such as asthma and arthritis.

Steroids also reduce the activity of the immune system, the body's natural defence against illness and infection.

This can help treat autoimmune conditions, such as rheumatoid arthritis or lupus, which are caused by the immune system mistakenly attacking the body.

Steroid tablets are different from the anabolic steroids used illegally by some people to increase their muscle mass.

Steroids
Steroids, also called corticosteroids, are anti-inflammatory medicines used to treat a range of conditions.

They're different from anabolic steroids, which are often used illegally by some people to increase their muscle mass.

Types of steroids
Steroids come in many different forms.

The main types are:

tablets and liquids – such as prednisolone
inhalers – such as beclometasone and fluticasone
nasal sprays – such as beclometasone and fluticasone
injections (given into joints, muscles or blood vessels) – such as methylprednisolone
creams, lotions and gels – such as hydrocortisone for skin
Most steroids are only available on prescription, but a few (such as some creams or nasal sprays) can be bought from pharmacies and shops.

Side effects of steroids
Steroids do not tend to cause significant side effects if they're taken for a short time or at a low dose.

But sometimes they can cause unpleasant side effects, such as an increased appetite, mood changes and difficulty sleeping (insomnia). This is most common with steroid tablets.

The side effects will usually pass once you finish the treatment, but do not stop taking your medicine without speaking to your doctor. Your doctor will advise you on how to gradually reduce your dose if necessary. Stopping a prescribed course of medicine suddenly can cause further unpleasant side effects (withdrawal symptoms).

Read more about the side effects of:

steroid tablets
steroid inhalers
steroid nasal sprays
steroid injections
steroid creams
You can report any suspected side effect to the Yellow Card Scheme.

Steroid cards
If you need to take high doses of steroids you may need to carry a blue steroid treatment card or a red steroid emergency card. Ask your doctor about these.

The blue steroid treatment card has details of your treatment and how you can reduce the risks of side effects.

The red steroid emergency card warns healthcare professionals that you're taking steroids in case you need emergency treatment.

If you need any medical or dental treatment, show your blue or red steroid card to the doctor, dentist or pharmacist so that they know you're taking steroids.

Uses for steroids
Steroids can be used to treat a wide range of conditions, including:

asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
hay fever
severe hives
eczema
painful joints or muscles – such as arthritis, tennis elbow and frozen shoulder
pain caused by an irritated or trapped nerve – such as severe sciatica
inflammatory bowel disease – such as Crohn's disease
lupus
multiple sclerosis (MS)
How steroids work
Steroids are a man-made version of hormones normally produced by the adrenal glands which are 2 small glands found above the kidneys.

Steroids reduce redness and swelling (inflammation). This can help with inflammatory conditions such as asthma and eczema.

Steroids also reduce the activity of the immune system, which is the body's natural defence against illness and infection.

This can help treat autoimmune conditions, such as rheumatoid arthritis or lupus, which are caused by the immune system mistakenly attacking the body.

About sulfasalazine
Sulfasalazine is used to treat ulcerative colitis, Crohn's disease and other types of inflammatory bowel disease.

It can also be used to treat rheumatoid arthritis.

It belongs to a group of medicines called aminosalicylates. These medicines help to reduce redness and swelling (inflammation) and can help with healing.

Sulfasalazine is available on prescription only.

It comes as tablets or a liquid that your swallow. It also comes as suppositories (a medicine that you push into your bottom).

Some people take sulfasalazine together with steroids to improve their symptoms.

Key facts
Different types of sulfasalazine work on different parts of your gut. Suppositories are prescribed for the end part of the bowel.
You'll usually need blood tests, liver tests and kidney tests before you start treatment with sulfasalazine, and then regular monitoring tests.
Drink plenty of fluids when taking sulfasalazine to help prevent possible kidney problems.
Common side effects of sulfasalazine include indigestion and feeling sick. It can also turn your pee orange and stain certain types of soft contact lenses.
If sulfasalazine makes you feel dizzy, do not drive, cycle or use machinery or tools until you feel better.


About sumatriptan
-Brand names: Imigran, Migraitan, Boots Migraine Relief
Sumatriptan is a medicine to treat migraines and cluster headaches. It does not prevent these conditions.

It's not fully understood what causes migraines and cluster headaches, but it may be due to the temporary widening of blood vessels in your brain. Sumatriptan works by narrowing these blood vessels again.

You'll usually take or use sumatriptan once a migraine or cluster headache has started. It is not a painkiller but you can use this medicine if painkillers or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have not worked.

Sumatriptan comes as tablets, a nasal spray or injection. The nasal spray and injection are used to treat migraines and cluster headaches. The tablets are for migraines only.

Sumatriptan is available on prescription. You can also buy packs containing two, 50mg tablets from a pharmacy without a prescription, but only if you have previously been diagnosed with migraines.

Key facts
Take or use sumatriptan as soon as your migraine or cluster headache starts.
The tablets usually work within 30 to 60 minutes. The spray and injection work quicker.
Common side effects include feeling or being sick, feeling sleepy or feeling dizzy.
Do not take migraine medicines such as ergotamine or other triptans when taking sumatriptan. This can increase side effects and the risk of an overdose.
Do not have more than 2 injections, 2 doses of nasal spray, or more than 300mg of tablets in 24 hours.




About tadalafil
-Brand names: Cialis, Adcirca
Tadalafil is a medicine used to treat erection problems (erectile dysfunction) and symptoms of an enlarged prostate (benign prostate enlargement).

It's also sometimes used to treat pulmonary hypertension (high blood pressure in the blood vessels that supply the lungs).

If you have erection problems, tadalafil works by temporarily increasing blood flow to the penis when you get sexually excited.

If you have symptoms of an enlarged prostate gland, such as difficulty peeing or needing to pee urgently, tadalafil works by relaxing the muscles in the prostate and bladder.

In pulmonary hypertension it works by relaxing blood vessels in the chest.

Tadalafil is available on prescription only. It comes as tablets.

You can only get it on prescription for erectile dysfunction if you have a specific condition such as multiple sclerosis or a spinal cord injury.

Tadalafil is not usually used to treat benign prostate enlargement because there is not enough evidence about how well it works.

If you do not meet the NHS criteria for tadalafil, you may get a private prescription from a doctor. This means you'll need to pay the full cost of the medicine.

Key facts
It usually takes 30 to 60 minutes for tadalafil to work for erectile dysfunction. You can take it at least 30 minutes before you want to have sex.
Taking tadalafil alone is not enough to cause an erection. You need to be sexually aroused for it to work.
The most common side effects are headaches, feeling sick, indigestion and facial flushes.
It can be dangerous to take tadalafil if you also take medicines called nitrates (often prescribed for chest pain). This combination can cause dangerously low blood pressure. If you're not sure if you're taking a nitrate, ask your doctor or pharmacist.
Do not drink grapefruit juice if you're taking tadalafil for pulmonary hypertension. It affects the way the medicine works.


About tamsulosin
-Brand names: Contiflo XL, Faramsil MR, Flomaxtra XL, Pamsvax XL, Tabphyn MR
Tamsulosin belongs to a group of medicines called alpha blockers.

It's used to treat men with symptoms of an enlarged prostate (benign prostate enlargement). It's also occasionally taken to treat kidney stones and prostatitis.

Alpha blockers reduce blood pressure by relaxing your blood vessels so blood can pass through them more easily.

Tamsulosin helps to reduce the symptoms of an enlarged prostate gland by relaxing the muscle around the bladder and prostate gland so you can pee more easily.

This medicine is available on prescription and you can also buy the brand Flomax Relief from pharmacies. It comes as tablets and capsules.

If you buy tamsulosin from a pharmacy, see a GP within 6 weeks of starting your treatment to make sure it's OK for you to carry on taking this medicine.

Tamsulosin is sometimes combined with other ingredients to treat bladder problems and enlarged prostate. Brand names include Vesomni (with solifenacin) and Combodart (with dutasteride).

Key facts
When you first take tamsulosin, you may feel dizzy or light-headed, or start sweating. If this happens it's best to sit or lie down until your feel better. Do not drink alcohol, drive, cycle or use tools or machinery.
You'll take tamsulosin once a day, usually in the morning after breakfast or the first meal of the day.
The main side effects of tamsulosin are feeling dizzy and problems when ejaculating (such as little or no semen).
Alcohol can increase the blood pressure-lowering effect of tamsulosin, which can make you feel dizzy or light-headed. It's best to stop drinking alcohol until you see how the medicine affects you.
Other brand names include Cositam XL, Flomax Relief, Losinate MR, Omsula MR, Tamfrex XL, Tamsumac MR and Tamurex MR.

About temazepam
Temazepam belongs to a group of medicines called benzodiazepines.

It's used to treat sleeping problems (insomnia).

It can also be taken to help you relax before an operation or other medical or dental treatments. This is known as a pre-med.

It works by increasing the levels of a calming chemical in your brain called gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA).

It comes as tablets or as a liquid that you swallow.

Temazepam is available on prescription only.

Key facts
Temazepam usually starts to work after around 30 minutes. The effect lasts for around 7 to 8 hours.
The most common side effects of temazepam include feeling drowsy or lightheaded, and having a dry mouth.
It's not recommended to use temazepam for longer than 4 weeks. If you take it for too long it's possible that you could get addicted.
If temazepam affects your eyesight or makes you feel sleepy, dizzy or confused, do not drive, ride a bike, or use tools or machines until you feel OK again.
Do not drink alcohol when taking temazepam. It can make you sleep very deeply. You may have breathing problems and difficulty waking up.

About terbinafine
-Brand names: Lamisil, Lamisil Once
Terbinafine is an antifungal medicine. It's used to treat skin infections caused by a fungus (yeast), including:

athlete's foot
fungal nail infections
ringworm
jock itch (sometimes called dhobie itch), an infection in the groin area
pityriasis versicolor – this causes small patches of scaly and discoloured skin, often on your back, chest, upper arms, neck and stomach
candidal skin infections
Terbinafine comes as a cream, gel or spray for treating athlete's foot, ringworm, jock itch, pityriasis versicolor and candidal skin infections. There's also a liquid (solution) for athlete's foot. You can buy these from a pharmacy or shop.

It also comes as tablets for treating fungal nail infections and other fungal infections. Your doctor may recommend tablets if they think creams, gels, sprays or solution are not likely to work. Terbinafine tablets are only available on prescription.

Key facts
Many fungal infections get better within 1 to 2 weeks of treatment with terbinafine. Nail infections can take 3 months or more.
The cream, gel and spray usually start to work within a week, and the tablets can take between 2 weeks and a few months to work.
When using terbinafine on your skin, the most common side effect is irritation in the area where you put it on.
If you're taking the tablets, the most common side effects are having a smaller appetite than usual, pain in your joints or muscles, or upset stomach.
It's important to finish the course of terbinafine, even if your symptoms get better. If you stop using it too soon the fungal infection could come back.
Do not give blood while taking terbinafine tablets. You'll need to wait at least 7 days after finishing the tablets before giving blood.

About thiamine
-Brand names: Benerva, Tyvera, Athiam, ThiaDose, ThiamEss
Thiamine, also known as thiamin or vitamin B1, is one the of B vitamins.

Thiamine helps to turn food into energy and to keep the nervous system healthy. Your body is not able to make thiamine for itself. However, you can usually get all you need from your food.

Synthetic thiamine can be used to treat or prevent vitamin B1 deficiency (this is when you do not have enough of this vitamin in your body).

It's sometimes also used to treat children with rare conditions like maple syrup urine disease and congenital lactic acidosis. A specialist doctor will need to prescribe it for them.

You can get thiamine on prescription. It comes as standard and slow-release tablets. For severe vitamin B deficiency it comes as an injection, but this is usually given in hospital.

You can buy thiamine supplements from pharmacies or shops. These include vitamin B complex tablets and multivitamin tablets where thiamine is listed as an ingredient.

Key facts
If you take thiamine to treat vitamin B1 deficiency, it may take a few weeks before you start to feel better.
You'll usually take thiamine once a day if you have a mild vitamin B1 deficiency.
You can take it with or without food.
It's best to avoid alcohol if you're taking thiamine for a vitamin B1 deficiency.
Some people may feel sick or have a stomach ache when taking thiamine, but these side effects are usually mild.

About tibolone
-Brand name: Livial
Tibolone is a type of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) that contains a synthetic (artificial) hormone. Your body breaks down tibolone to make substances that work in a similar way to the hormones oestrogen, progesterone and testosterone.

Tibolone helps to improve menopause symptoms, such as hot flushes, low mood and vaginal dryness or irritation.

Menopause is when your periods stop due to lower hormone levels. It usually affects women between the ages of 45 and 55, but it can happen earlier. It affects anyone who has periods.

Your hormone levels also fall if you have surgery to remove your ovaries, or if you take medicines called gonadorelin analogues, such as leuprorelin for endometriosis.

Tibolone helps restore your hormone levels.

It can also be prescribed to help stop your bones getting thinner after the menopause (osteoporosis).

Tibolone works in a similar way to taking combined HRT containing oestrogen and progestogen. Some studies have suggested it may not be as effective as combined HRT as it may not increase your oestrogen levels as much.

It's only suitable if you had your last period more than a year ago (post-menopause). However, if you've had surgery to remove your ovaries or you're taking gonadorelin analogues you can start taking it straight away.

Tibolone is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets.

Key facts
You'll usually take tibolone once a day.
Tibolone can take up to 3 months to work fully to improve your symptoms.
Common side effects include stomach pain, breast tenderness and vaginal irritation but these usually improve in the first few months of treatment.
If you feel that the HRT you're taking is not helping your symptoms, talk to a doctor. It can take time to find the right type and dose to suit you.
It's common to take tibolone for 2 to 5 years, and then try stopping to see if your menopause symptoms have improved. If your symptoms last for longer, your doctor can advise on the benefits and risks of continuing to take it.
It's important to see your doctor at least once a year for a check-up and to review whether you need to keep taking tibolone.


About ticagrelor
-Brand name: Brilique
Ticagrelor is an antiplatelet medicine. It prevents platelets (a type of blood cell) from sticking together and forming a dangerous blood clot.

Taking ticagrelor can help prevent blood clots if you have an increased risk of having them because you:

have had a heart attack
have unstable angina
have had a stroke or a transient ischaemic stroke (TIA, or mini-stroke)
Ticagrelor is only available on prescription. It comes as standard tablets that you usually swallow whole or tablets that melt in your mouth.

Key facts
You'll usually take ticagrelor twice a day.
Ticagrelor is often prescribed together with low-dose aspirin at the start of treatment.
The main side effects of ticagrelor are getting out of breath and bleeding more easily than normal. You may have nosebleeds, heavier periods, bleeding gums and bruising.
If ticagrelor makes you feel dizzy, do not drive, cycle or use machinery or tools until you feel better.
You can drink alcohol with ticagrelor. But do not drink too much while taking this medicine. It can irritate your stomach.
You may need to stop taking ticagrelor for a short time before having surgery or dental treatment, but check with your doctor or dentist first.

About timolol eye drops
-Brand names: Eysano, Timoptol, Timoptol LA, Tiopex
Timolol eye drops belong to a group of medicines called beta blockers.

They're used to treat glaucoma and high pressure inside the eye.

Increased pressure inside your eye can damage your optic nerve. This can cause vision loss or blindness. Timolol eye drops lower the pressure in your eye by reducing the build-up of fluid.

They come in eye drop bottles, which may have a preservative in them, or in single-dose droppers that are preservative-free.

Timolol is only available on prescription.

Timolol eye drops are sometimes combined with another medicine to make a combination eye drop. Ganfort is a brand of eye drops that contain both timolol and bimatoprost.

Timolol also comes as tablets that are used for high blood pressure (hypertension), chest pain caused by angina and to prevent migraines.

Find out about using timolol tablets.

Key facts
You'll usually use timolol eye drops once or twice a day.
Timolol eye drops usually start to reduce the pressure in your eye about 30 minutes after using them, although it may take up to 1 to 2 hours for the full effect. The reduced pressure will last for at least 24 hours.
Side effects of timolol eye drops can include eye pain, irritation or discomfort, swollen eyelids, eye infection or more sensitivity to light.
If the drops make you feel dizzy or affect your vision, do not drive or cycle until you feel better and can see normally again.
If you wear contact lenses, you’ll need to remove them before using timolol eye drops and wait for 15 minutes before putting them back in.

About timolol tablets
Timolol tablets belong to a group of medicines called beta blockers. They are used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension) and reduce chest pain caused by angina. They are also used to prevent migraines.

If you have high blood pressure, taking timolol can help to prevent future heart disease, or heart attacks.

Timolol is only available on prescription.

Timolol also comes combined with bendroflumethiazide (a diuretic medicine). These combination tablets are only used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension).

Timolol also comes as eye drops which are used for glaucoma.

Find out about using timolol eye drops.

Key facts
Timolol tablets slow down your heart rate which can make it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body.
You’ll usually take timolol once or twice a day.
Side effects of timolol tablets can include feeling tired or dizzy, cold fingers or toes, and feeling or being sick (nausea or vomiting).
Do not stop taking timolol tablets suddenly, especially if you have heart disease. This can make your condition worse.
If timolol makes you feel dizzy or tired, do not drive a car, ride a bike, or use tools or machinery until you feel better.


About tiotropium inhalers
-Brand names: Braltus, Spiriva, Spiriva Respimat
Tiotropium inhalers are used to prevent symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and sometimes asthma, such as coughing, wheezing and feeling breathless.

Tiotropium belongs to a group of medicines called anticholinergic bronchodilators. It works by relaxing muscles in your lungs and widening your airways. This makes it easier for you to breathe.

Tiotropium inhalers (sometimes called "puffers") are known as preventer inhalers. If you have COPD or asthma, you'll use your inhaler regularly to help prevent you from getting symptoms.

Tiotropium inhalers are available on prescription only.

Some inhalers contain tiotropium mixed with other medicines that help your breathing, such as olodaterol. Brand names of tiotropium mixed with olodaterol are Spiolto Respimat and Yanimo Respimat.

Key facts
Tiotropium is a long-acting medicine. You'll usually use your tiotropium inhaler just once a day.
You'll usually start to find it easier to breathe after using a tiotropium inhaler for 3 to 7 days.
You need to use it every day for it to work, even if you do not have symptoms.
Tiotropium comes as different types of inhaler that work with either capsules or cartridges. Check the instructions for the inhaler you're using.
The most common side effect of tiotropium is a dry mouth.

About tolterodine
-Brand names: Neditol, Detrusitol, Mariosea
Tolterodine is a medicine used to treat symptoms of an overactive bladder. These can include:

a sudden and urgent need to pee (urinary urgency)
needing to pee more often than usual (urinary frequency)
wetting yourself if you cannot make it to the toilet in time (urinary incontinence)
It's also used to treat bedwetting in children (nocturnal enuresis).

Tolterodine works by relaxing the muscles in your bladder. This means your bladder can hold more liquid and you do not need to pee as often or as urgently.

Tolterodine is only available on prescription.

It comes as standard tablets and slow-release capsules (also called prolonged release or XL). This means the capsules release tolterodine slowly and evenly throughout the day.

Key facts
You'll usually take tolterodine tablets twice a day or slow-release capsules once a day.
Tolterodine starts to work within 3 to 6 hours but it may take 4 weeks or longer to work fully. If your symptoms do not start to improve after 1 to 2 weeks, talk to your doctor.
Your doctor will check after 4 weeks that tolterodine is working and is the best treatment for you. They'll also review, every 6 to 12 months, whether your treatment is still needed.
Common side effects of tolterodine include a dry mouth, blurred vision, constipation and feeling dizzy or sleepy.
Do not drive a car or ride a bike if tolterodine makes you sleepy, gives you blurred vision, or makes you feel dizzy, clumsy or unable to concentrate.
It's best not to drink alcohol when you first start taking tolterodine, as it can make you very sleepy.

Topical corticosteroids
Topical corticosteroids are a type of steroid medicine applied directly to the skin to reduce inflammation and irritation.

Topical corticosteroids are available in several different forms, including:

creams
lotions
gels
mousses
ointments
tapes and bandages
solutions
They're available in 4 different strengths (potencies):

mild
moderate
potent
very potent
Mild corticosteroids, such as clobetasone, hydrocortisone skin cream and hydrocortisone for piles and itchy bottom, can often be bought over the counter from pharmacies.

Stronger types, such as beclometasone, betamethasone, clobetasol, fluticasone and mometasone, are only available on prescription.

Read about other types of corticosteroids, including tablets, capsules, inhalers and injected corticosteroids.

Corticosteroids should not be confused with anabolic steroids.

Conditions treated with topical corticosteroids
Conditions widely treated with topical corticosteroids include:

eczema – such as atopic eczema
contact dermatitis – which causes symptoms such as dandruff and scaly patches on the skin
psoriasis
Topical corticosteroids cannot cure these conditions, but can help relieve the symptoms.

Who can use topical corticosteroids
Most adults and children can use topical corticosteroids safely, but there are situations when they are not recommended.

They should not be used if:

you have infected skin, unless advised by a doctor
you have certain skin conditions, including rosacea and acne
Most topical corticosteroids are considered safe to use during pregnancy or breastfeeding. Your doctor will consider the area of skin where you need to use it, how often you'll use it and the condition of your skin. You should wash off any steroid cream applied to your breasts before feeding your baby.

Very potent topical corticosteroids are not usually prescribed for pregnant or breastfeeding women, or for very young children. Sometimes you may be prescribed them under the supervision of a skincare specialist (dermatologist).

How to use topical corticosteroids
Unless instructed otherwise by your doctor, follow the directions on the patient information leaflet that comes with the medicine. This will give details of how much to apply and how often.

Most people only need to use the medicine once or twice a day for 3 to 7 days. Occasionally a doctor may suggest using it less frequently over a longer period of time.

The medicine should only be applied to affected areas of skin. Gently smooth a thin layer onto your skin in the direction the hair grows. Wash your hands before and after you've applied the medicine, unless you are treating an area on your hands.

If you're using both topical corticosteroids and emollients, wait 20 to 30 minutes between using them.

Fingertip units
Sometimes, the amount of medicine you're advised to use will be given in fingertip units (FTUs).

A FTU (about 500mg) is the amount needed to squeeze a line from the tip of an adult finger to the first crease of the finger. It should be enough to treat an area of skin double the size of the flat of your hand with your fingers together.

The recommended dosage will depend on what part of the body is being treated. This is because the skin is thinner in certain parts of the body and more sensitive to the effects of corticosteroids.

For adults, the recommended FTUs to be applied in a single dose are:

0.5 FTU for genitals
1 FTU for hands, elbows or knees
1.5 FTUs for the feet, including the soles
2.5 FTUs for the face and neck
3 FTUs for the scalp
4 FTUs for a hand and arm together, or the buttocks
8 FTUs for 1 leg and foot, the chest or back
For children, the recommended FTUs will depend on their age. A GP can advise you on this.

Side effects of topical corticosteroids
If you use them correctly, topical corticosteroids rarely have serious side effects.

The most common side effect of topical corticosteroids is a burning or stinging sensation when the medicine is applied. However, this usually improves as your skin gets used to the treatment.

Less common side effects can include:

worsening or spreading of a skin infection you already have
inflamed hair follicles (folliculitis)
thinning of the skin, which can make the affected skin more vulnerable to damage; for example, you may bruise more easily
stretch marks, which are likely to be permanent, although they'll probably become less noticeable over time
contact dermatitis, which is a skin irritation caused by a mild allergic reaction to the substances in a particular topical corticosteroid
acne, or worsening of acne
rosacea, which is a condition that causes the face to become red and flushed
changes in skin colour – this is usually more noticeable in people with dark skin
excessive hair growth on the area of skin being treated
Side effects are more likely if you're:

using a more potent corticosteroid
using it for a very long time, or over a large area
The elderly and very young are more vulnerable to side effects.

If potent or very potent topical corticosteroids are used for a long time or over a large area, there's a risk of the medicine being absorbed into the bloodstream and causing internal side effects, such as:

decreased growth in children
Cushing's syndrome
This is not a full list of all the possible side effects. For more information on side effects, see the leaflet that comes with the medicine.

If you're using a potent or very potent topical corticosteroid for several weeks or more, you may be given a steroid treatment card that explains how you can reduce the risk of side effects.

If you need any medical or dental treatment, show your steroid treatment card to the doctor, dentist or pharmacist so they know that you're using topical corticosteroids.

Withdrawal side effects
If you stop using topical corticosteroids after using them continuously for a long time (usually over 12 months in adults), you may have a withdrawal reaction. These can sometimes be severe. Your doctor may advise stopping the treatment gradually to avoid this.

Withdrawal side effects can include:

redness or changes in skin colour (this may not be as noticeable on brown or black skin)
burning, stinging, itching or peeling of the skin, or oozing, open sores
a flare up of the skin condition you were treating
If you’ve been using topical corticosteroids for a long time, it’s a good idea to ask your doctor to review your treatment.

Reporting side effects
The Yellow Card Scheme allows you to report suspected side effects from any type of medicine you're taking. It's run by the medicines safety watchdog called the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA).

About topiramate
Topiramate is a medicine used to treat epilepsy. These are also called anti-epileptic medicines.

It can also be taken to help prevent migraine.

Topiramate works by reducing bursts of electrical activity in your brain and restoring the normal balance of nerve activity.

This medicine is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets, capsules and a liquid you swallow.

If taken during pregnancy, topiramate can increase the risk of birth defects and learning and behaviour problems in your child. Topiramate is not recommended if there's a chance that you could become pregnant.

For women and girls of childbearing age, if there are no other suitable treatments and you do need to take topiramate for epilepsy, your doctor will enrol you on the pregnancy prevention programme.

Important:Topiramate pregnancy prevention programme
The pregnancy prevention programme aims to stop you from accidently becoming pregnant while taking topiramate. It includes:

an annual review – you should be reviewed every year by your doctor or nurse, who will assess whether you need to continue taking topiramate or whether it's possible to change your medicine
contraception advice – if you are taking topiramate then you must be using reliable contraception, even if you're not currently sexually active
Your doctor or nurse can advise you about reliable contraception. You'll be asked to sign a form to say that you're using contraception and understand the risks of becoming pregnant while taking topiramate.

It's important to get advice from your doctor if:

you become pregnant
you want to plan a pregnancy
Key facts
If you're taking topiramate for epilepsy, it can take 2 to 4 weeks to work fully. If you're taking it to prevent migraines, it can take up to 3 months for it to work fully.
You'll usually take topiramate twice a day. You can take it with or without food.
Common side effects of topiramate include feeling sleepy, feeling dizzy, diarrhoea and feeling sick. These are usually mild and go away by themselves. Do not drive, cycle or use machinery if you're feeling sleepy or dizzy.
If you want to switch from topiramate to another medicine, it's very important to follow your doctor's advice. You'll need to start taking the new one at a low dose and slowly build up the dose while you're still taking topiramate.
If you have epilepsy, you're entitled to free prescriptions for all of your medicines, not just your epilepsy ones.
If you're pregnant, or there's a chance you could become pregnant, topiramate is not recommended for treating migraine. For epilepsy, your doctor will only prescribe topiramate for you if there are no other suitable treatments.

About tramadol
Tramadol is a strong painkiller from a group of medicines called opiates, or narcotics. It's used to treat moderate to severe pain, for example after an operation or a serious injury. If you have long term pain, your doctor may also prescribe it if weaker painkillers no longer work.

Tramadol does not stop the pain completely, but you will not be able to feel it as much.

Tramadol is available only on prescription. It comes as tablets, capsules and liquid drops that you swallow. It can also be given by injection, but this is usually only done in hospital.

Key facts
It's possible to become addicted to tramadol, but your doctor will explain how to reduce those risks.
If you need to take tramadol for more than a few weeks, your treatment plan may include details of how and when to stop taking this medicine.
It's best not to drink alcohol with tramadol as you're more likely to get side effects, like feeling sleepy.
Do not drive a car, ride a bike or use tools or machinery if tramadol makes you sleepy, dizzy, or clumsy or you have blurred vision or are unable to concentrate or make decisions.
Tramadol is also called by the brand names Invodol, Larapam, Mabron, Maneo, Oldaram, Tilodol, Tradorec and Zeridame.

About tranexamic acid
-Brand names: Cyklokapron, Evana Heavy Period Relief
Tranexamic acid (sometimes shortened to TXA) is a medicine that controls bleeding. It helps your blood to clot and is used for nosebleeds and heavy periods.

If you're having a tooth taken out, using tranexamic acid mouthwash can help stop bleeding.

Tranexamic acid can also help if you have a condition that causes swelling under the skin (hereditary angioedema).

If you have any condition that causes you to bleed more than usual, you may need to take tranexamic acid for a few days before having surgery or dental surgery.

Tranexamic acid is available on prescription as:

tablets
mouthwash
injections – usually only given in hospital
Tranexamic acid tablets for heavy periods are also available to buy from pharmacies, for adults aged 18 and over.

Key facts
You'll usually take tranexamic acid 3 times a day for a few days at a time.
It can take up to 24 hours for the medicine to work fully.
You can take the tablets with or without food.
Most people do not have any side effects when taking tranexamic acid tablets.
Speak to your doctor if you also take the combined contraceptive pill ("the pill"), as there's a very small increased risk of DVT (deep vein thrombosis) with tranexamic acid.

About trastuzumab
-Brand names: Herceptin, Herzuma, Kanjinti, Ontruzant, Trazimera, Zercepac
Trastuzumab is a biological medicine. It's used to treat some types of cancer including breast cancer in women, breast cancer in men, oesophageal cancer and stomach cancer.

Trastuzumab is known as a targeted therapy. Targeted therapies are medicines that change the way cells work and help to stop cancer from growing and spreading. Trastuzumab helps to control cancer cells that contain high amounts of HER2 (human epidermal growth factor receptor 2).

HER2 is found in all human cells. It controls cell growth and repair. High levels of HER2 are found in some types of breast, oesophageal and stomach cancer, which helps the cancer cells grow and survive. These are known as HER2 positive cancers. Around 1 in 5 breast and stomach cancers are HER2 positive.

Trastuzumab is available on prescription. It's given in a hospital or clinic as a drip (infusion) or an injection into your thigh (subcutaneous).

Herceptin is the brand name of the original trastuzumab medicine.

There are now other versions of trastuzumab, known by the brand names Herzuma, Kanjinti, Ontruzant, Trazimera and Zercepac. These are biosimilars which are like the original biological medicine. These versions all contain trastuzumab on its own. You'll be prescribed trastuzumab using one of these brand names.

Key facts
Trastuzumab works by blocking the effects of HER2 and encouraging the immune system (your body's natural defences) to attack and kill the cancer cells.
The most common side effects of trastuzumab include feeling tired or dizzy, problems sleeping and diarrhoea.
Your doctor will monitor your heart while you're on treatment and for some time after you stop.
Trastuzumab may work more quickly for some people than others. You'll have regular check-ups while you're having treatment to make sure it's working well for you.
It may take over 6 months for trastuzumab to leave your body. Tell your doctor, pharmacist or nurse if you start any new medicine or need to have any vaccines. If your immune system is weak you need to avoid live vaccines.

About trazodone
Trazodone is an antidepressant medicine. It's used to treat depression, anxiety, or a combination of depression and anxiety.

Trazodone works by increasing your levels of serotonin and noradrenaline so you feel better.

It can help if you're having problems like low mood, not sleeping (insomnia) and poor concentration.

Trazodone comes as tablets, capsules and liquid that you swallow. It's only available on prescription.

Key facts
Doctors usually prescribe trazodone when other antidepressants have not worked or have caused side effects.
It can take 1 to 2 weeks before trazodone starts to work, but it may be 4 to 6 weeks before you feel the full benefit.
Trazodone can make you feel sleepy. If you take it once a day, it's best to take it in the evening or before you go to bed.
If you and your doctor decide to take you off trazodone, your doctor will usually recommend reducing your dose gradually to help prevent withdrawal side effects.

. About trimethoprim
Trimethoprim is an antibiotic.

It's used to treat and prevent urinary tract infections (UTIs), such as cystitis.

Occasionally, trimethoprim is used to treat other types of infections, such as chest infections and acne.

Trimethoprim is available on prescription. It comes as tablets and as a liquid that you swallow.

2. Key facts
You'll usually take trimethoprim twice a day to treat infections.
For most infections, you'll feel better within a few days. But it's important to finish your course of trimethoprim to help stop your infection from coming back.
Side effects may include itching or a skin rash, but these are usually mild and short-lived.
You can drink alcohol while taking trimethoprim.
Tell your doctor if you do not start feeling better after taking trimethoprim for 3 days, or if you start to feel worse at any time.

About Utrogestan
Utrogestan (micronised progesterone) is a medicine that contains a hormone called progesterone. Progesterone is a type of progestogen that's identical to the hormone your body produces.

Your ovaries produce progesterone and oestrogen until the menopause, when your periods stop. Menopause usually affects women between the ages of 45 and 55, but it can happen earlier. It affects anyone who has periods.

Progesterone is produced during the second half of your menstrual cycle. As you reach menopause, the amount of progesterone and oestrogen that your body produces falls.

Utrogestan is taken along with oestrogen as part of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) to relieve the menopause symptoms you may have when your body produces less of these hormones. Taking progesterone with oestrogen is known as combined HRT.

Oestrogen-based HRT can thicken the womb lining. This slightly increases the risk of womb cancer. Taking progesterone together with oestrogen reduces this risk.

Progesterone stops the womb lining from getting too thick, and when you stop taking it (usually for a few days each month) this causes the womb lining to be shed, like a period, which helps to protect you from womb cancer.

You'll need to take combined HRT if you still have a womb.

Utrogestan is only available on prescription. It comes as capsules that you swallow.

Utrogestan also comes as vaginal capsules but these are only used as part of fertility treatment (IVF).

Key facts
You'll usually take Utrogestan on certain days each month: either 2 capsules every day on days 15 to 26, or 1 capsule every day on days 1 to 25 of your medicine's 28 day cycle. Sometimes you might be advised to take it every day without a break.
HRT can take up to 3 months to fully improve your symptoms.
Common side effects include changes in your periods, breast tenderness and headaches, but these usually improve in the first few months of treatment.
If you feel that the HRT you're taking is not helping your symptoms, talk to a doctor. It can take time to find the right type and dose to suit you.
It's common to take HRT for 2 to 5 years, and then try stopping to see if until your menopause symptoms have improved. If your symptoms last for longer, your doctor can advise on the benefits and risks of continuing to take HRT.
It's important to see your doctor at least once a year for a check-up and to review whether you need to keep taking HRT.


About vaginal oestrogen
-Brand names: Vagifem, Gina, Ovesse, Ovestin, Vagirux
Vaginal oestrogen is a hormone replacement therapy (HRT) medicine that contains the hormone oestrogen. It's used to treat the vaginal dryness and irritation that can happen during the menopause.

Menopause is when your periods stop due to lower hormone levels. It usually affects women between the ages of 45 and 55, but it can happen earlier. It affects anyone who has periods.

The fall in the amount of oestrogen your body produces can cause symptoms. Using vaginal oestrogen can help dryness and irritation but it will not treat other symptoms of the menopause such as hot flushes, mood swings or problems sleeping (insomnia).

Vaginal oestrogen comes as a tablet, pessary, cream, gel or ring that you insert into your vagina. Using oestrogen inside the vagina only is called local HRT.

Usually, if you take or use oestrogen you must also use a progestogen alongside it, to protect your womb. But with vaginal oestrogen, little of the medicine gets into the rest of your body, so you do not need to take progestogen.

If vaginal oestrogen is not enough to treat your symptoms, you can also use a higher dose of HRT.

Vaginal oestrogen is only available on prescription, except the brands Gina (vaginal tablets) and Ovesse (vaginal cream) which you can buy from a pharmacy.

Other brands of vaginal oestrogen include Vagifem and Vagirux vaginal tablets, Estring vaginal ring, Imvaggis pessaries, Blissel vaginal gel and Ovestin vaginal cream.

Key facts
Vaginal oestrogen is a local HRT. This means it's only used to treat menopause symptoms such as vaginal dryness and irritation.
Common early side effects include headache, abdominal or vaginal pain and bleeding but these normally improve in the first few months of treatment.
It can take up to 3 months to work fully.
Vaginal oestrogen does not have the same risks as other types of HRT, because the dose is low and little of the medicine gets into the rest of your body.

About valproic acid
-Brand names: Belvo, Depakote, Convulex, Syonell
Valproic acid is usually used to treat bipolar disorder.

Some brands are used to treat epilepsy. It can also be used to prevent migraine.

This medicine is only available on prescription. If you're under 55 years old, it will need to be prescribed by a specialist doctor. The doctor will also need a second opinion from another specialist to show that there is no other suitable treatment for you.

It comes as capsules or tablets.

If taken during pregnancy, valproic acid can cause problems for a baby's development, including birth defects and lifelong learning difficulties. Valproic acid is not recommended if there's a chance that you could become pregnant.

For women and girls of childbearing age, if you do need to take valproic acid then your doctor will enrol you on the valproate pregnancy prevention programme, called Prevent.

For men taking valproic acid, your fertility could be affected. It may also cause learning or behavioural problems in your child if your partner becomes pregnant while you're taking valproic acid.

Important:Valproate pregnancy prevention programme
The valproate pregnancy prevention programme aims to stop you from accidentally becoming pregnant while taking valproic acid. It includes:

an annual review – you should be reviewed every year by your doctor or nurse, who will assess whether you need to continue taking valproic acid or whether it's possible to change your medicine
contraception advice – if you are taking valproic acid then you must be using reliable contraception, even if you're not currently sexually active
Your doctor or nurse can advise you about reliable contraception. You'll be asked to sign a form to say that you're using contraception and understand the risks of becoming pregnant while taking valproic acid.

It's important to get advice from your doctor if:

you become pregnant
you want to plan a pregnancy
For men who could possibly have children, it's important to discuss valproic acid with your doctor. You and your partner should use contraception while you're taking valproic acid and for at least 3 months after stopping.

For men who are planning to start a family within the next year, speak to a doctor about your treatment options. Do not stop taking valproic acid without speaking to a doctor first.

Updated: 11 March 2025

Find out more about Prevent, the valproate pregnancy prevention programme, on the Electronic Medicines Compendium website (PDF only, 318KB).

Key facts
You'll usually take valproic acid 2 to 4 times a day. You can take it with or without food.
You'll usually start on a low dose. Your dose will gradually increase over a few days or weeks.
There are other valproate medicines such as sodium valproate that are similar to valproic acid and work in the same way. However, these medicines are used to treat different conditions and doses will vary.
Some brands of valproate medicines, such as Belvo, Syonell and Depakote, contain semisodium valproate which is a mixture of valproic acid and sodium valproate.
There are also brands such as Epilim Chrono, Epilim Chronosphere and Dyzantil, which contain mostly sodium valproate, with some valproic acid.
If you're pregnant, or there's a chance you could become pregnant, valproic acid is not recommended for treating migraines. For epilepsy and bipolar disorder, your doctor will only prescribe valproic acid for you if there are no other suitable treatments.

About valsartan
Valsartan is an angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) medicine widely used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension) and heart failure. It's also sometimes prescribed after a heart attack.

It relaxes and widens your blood vessels. This lowers your blood pressure and makes it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body.

Some people take valsartan in combination with other medicines:

with amlodipine (brand name Exforge) to treat high blood pressure
with hydrochlorothiazide (brand name Co-Diovan) to treat high blood pressure
with sacubitril (brand name Entresto) to treat a type of long-term heart failure
Valsartan is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets, capsules and as a liquid that you swallow.

Key facts
Valsartan is often prescribed if you have to stop taking a similar medicine because it gave you a dry, irritating cough.
If you get very bad diarrhoea or start being sick (vomiting) from a stomach bug or illness, tell your doctor. You may need to stop taking valsartan until you feel better.
The main side effect of valsartan is feeling dizzy, but it's usually mild and does not last long.
Valsartan is not normally recommended in pregnancy. Talk to your doctor if you're trying to get pregnant or you're already pregnant.
Do not use salt substitutes such as Lo-Salt while taking valsartan. They contain potassium and can make the levels of potassium in your blood too high.


About varenicline
Varenicline (previously called Champix) is a medicine that can help you stop smoking.

The addictive part of cigarette tobacco is called nicotine. Varenicline can reduce the cravings for nicotine and helps with the withdrawal you get when you stop smoking. These symptoms can include an urge to smoke again, feeling depressed or irritable, and difficulty sleeping.

Varenicline is only available on prescription and comes as tablets.

Key facts
Varenicline, along with support such as counselling, should increase your chances of stopping.
1 course of varenicline treatment lasts 12 weeks.
After several days of taking varenicline, you'll usually notice that you’re craving fewer cigarettes each day.
Common side effects include headaches, feeling sick or feeling dizzy.
It’s important to decide on a date to stop smoking. When you do, you’ll aim to start taking varenicline 1 to 2 weeks before this date.

About venlafaxine
Venlafaxine is from of a group of antidepressants called serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors, or SNRIs. It is thought to work by increasing the levels of mood-enhancing chemicals called serotonin and noradrenaline in the brain.

It’s used to treat depression and sometimes anxiety and panic attacks.

Venlafaxine can help people recover from depression, and has fewer side effects than some older antidepressants.

It comes as tablets and capsules which are available only on prescription.

Key facts
It usually takes 4 to 6 weeks for venlafaxine to work fully, although you should start to feel better after 1 to 2 weeks.
Side effects such as feeling sick, headaches, sweating, and dry mouth are common. They are usually mild and go away after a couple of weeks.
If you and your doctor decide to take you off venlafaxine, your doctor will recommend reducing your dose gradually to help prevent withdrawal symptoms.
Venlafaxine can make your heart beat faster or cause an irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia), so your doctor may not think it is suitable if you are already taking medicine for your heart
Venlafaxine will not change your personality, it will simply help you feel like yourself again.


About verapamil
-Brand names: Securon, Verapress, Vera-Til
Verapamil is a calcium channel blocker used to treat irregular heart rhythms (arrhythmias) and high blood pressure.

If you have high blood pressure, verapamil helps to prevent future heart disease, heart attacks and stroke. You may also need to take it if you've had a heart attack.

Verapamil is also used to prevent chest pain caused by angina.

A specialist can also prescribe verapamil for cluster headaches. It can reduce the number of headaches you get.

Verapamil works by relaxing and widening blood vessels. This lowers blood pressure and helps to improve the blood and oxygen supply to your heart. It also relaxes the heart and slows down the heart rate, which helps to treat heart rhythm problems.

Verapamil is only available on prescription.

It comes as standard or slow-release tablets or as a liquid you swallow. It's also given as an injection, but this is usually only done in hospital.

Key facts
Verapamil starts to work on the day you start taking it, but it may take 1 to 2 weeks to work fully.
The most common side effect of verapamil is constipation.
Do not eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice while you're taking verapamil. It can increase the amount of verapamil in your body and make side effects worse.
If verapamil makes you feel dizzy, do not drive a car, ride a bike, or use tools or machinery until you feel better.
It's important to keep taking verapamil. Stopping may cause your blood pressure to rise and this may increase your risk of a heart attack or stroke.

About warfarin
Warfarin is a type of medicine known as an anticoagulant.

It makes your blood flow through your veins more easily. This means your blood will be less likely to make a dangerous blood clot.

Warfarin is used to treat blood clots and help prevent future blood clots if you've had one previously, such as:

a blood clot in the leg (deep vein thrombosis, or DVT)
a blood clot in the lungs (pulmonary embolism)
It's also used to prevent blood clots if you're at high risk of having them in the future.

This includes people with:

an irregular heartbeat (atrial fibrillation)
a replacement or mechanical heart valve
a blood clotting disorder, such as thrombophilia
a higher chance of having a blood clot after an operation
Warfarin is only available on prescription. It comes as tablets and as a liquid that you swallow.

Key facts
You'll usually take warfarin once a day in the evening.
The most common side effect of warfarin is bleeding more easily than normal, such as having nosebleeds, bleeding gums, heavier periods and bruising. This is most likely to happen if you're unwell.
You need to have blood tests at least every 12 weeks while you're taking warfarin to make sure your dose is right.
It's normal for your warfarin dose to go up or down. The dose can depend on lots of different things, including what you eat and drink, what other medicines you're taking, and if you become unwell.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you an anticoagulant alert card. Always carry this with you. Show it to your doctor or dentist before you have any medical or dental procedures, including vaccinations and routine appointments with the dental hygienist.

About zolpidem
Zolpidem is a sleeping pill that can be taken for short-term treatment of severe insomnia.

It helps you fall asleep more quickly and makes you less likely to wake up during the night. It works by affecting a calming chemical in your brain called gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA).

Zolpidem comes as tablets. It's only available on prescription.

Key facts
Zolpidem takes around 1 hour to work.
You'll usually take it for a few days or weeks (up to 4 weeks). It's only used for a short period because your body gets used to it quickly. After a few weeks, it's unlikely to have the same effect. Your body can also become dependent on it.
Common side effects are a metallic taste in your mouth or a dry mouth, and feeling sleepy in the daytime.
Do not drink alcohol while you're on zolpidem. Having them together can make you go into a deep sleep where you find it difficult to wake up.
If zolpidem makes you feel sleepy in the daytime, do not drive a car, ride a bike or use machinery.

About zopiclone
Zopiclone is a type of sleeping pill that can be taken for short-term treatment of severe insomnia.

It helps you fall asleep more quickly, and also helps stop you waking up during the night. It works by affecting a calming chemical in your brain called gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA).

Zopiclone comes as tablets. It also comes as a liquid for people who find it hard to swallow tablets, but your doctor will have to order this specially.

This medicine is only available on prescription.

Key facts
Zopiclone takes around 1 hour to work.
It's usually prescribed for just 2 to 4 weeks. This is because your body gets used to it quickly and after this time it's unlikely to have the same effect. Your body can also become dependent on it.
Common side effects are a metallic taste in your mouth, a dry mouth, and daytime sleepiness.
Do not drink alcohol while you're on zopiclone. Having them together can make you go into a deep sleep where you find it difficult to wake up.
If zopiclone makes you feel sleepy in the daytime, do not drive a car, ride a bike or use machinery.


